.TH NETCP 1 2/24/79
.UC
.ds s 1
.ds o 1
.SH NAME
netcp \- remote copy of files through the net
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B netcp
[
.B \-l
login ] [
.B \-p
password ]
[
.B \-f
] [
.B \-n
] fromfile tofile
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Netcp
copies files between machines and is similar to
.IR cp (\*o).
At least one of
.I fromfile
and
.I tofile
must be remote; the
.B \-l
and 
.B \-p
options specify the login name and password
for that remote machine.
If these options are not specified,
the name and password are prompted for on the terminal.
The
.B \-f
option forces prompting for the login name and password;
the 
.B \-n
option prevents confirmation
or error messages from being returned.
.PP
.I Fromfile
and
.I tofile
follow these conventions:
.TP 4
1.
A simple filename is assumed to be local and from the current directory.
.TP 4
2.
A filename preceded by a machine designator (see below)
is a reference to a file on the specified remote machine.
If a full pathname is not given, it is assumed to be from the login directory.
.PP
Examples:
.IP "    grades.p" 20
file in the current directory on local machine
.IP "    C:junk" 20
file in your login directory on C
.IP "    /usr/lib/pq" 20
file on local machine
.IP "    C:comp/c2.c" 20
file in a subdirectory on C machine
.PP
.I Netcp
executes the
.IR net (\*s) 
command.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
net(\*s), netrm(\*s), netq(\*s), netlog(\*s),
netlpr(\*s), netmail(\*s), cp(\*o), mail(\*o)
.SH AUTHOR
Eric Schmidt
.SH BUGS
The second filename may not be defaulted to a directory name,
it must be given explicitly.
.br
The file mode may or may not be set correctly.
