.if n .ds La '
.if n .ds Ra '
.if t .ds La `
.if t .ds Ra '
.if n .ds Lq "
.if n .ds Rq "
.if t .ds Lq ``
.if t .ds Rq ''
.TH SENDBATCH 8 "October 13, 1986"
.ds ]W  Version B 2.11
.SH NAME
sendbatch \- send news articles in batches
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BR sendbatch " ["
.BI \-s "size "
] [
.BI \-i " sitename"
] [
.BR \-c " ] ["
.BR \-c7 " ] ["
.I \-obBC 
.RI "] " site
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I sendbatch
prepares and transmits a batch of news for unbatching by another machine.
.PP
If
.I sendbatch
is called with no flags, it will submit the batched news (from
.IR /usr/spool/news/site )
queued up for 
.B site
to 
.I uux
for transmission and exectution on the remote machine.
.PP
Several flags are available to modify sendbatch's behavior.
.PP
The
.B \-c
flag says to use compression to reduce the site of the transmitted file.
.PP
The
.B \-c7
flag is normally used for sending articles over X.25 links.
It will cause the batch of news to be compressed, then piped through
.I encode
to reduce the 8-bit data into 7-bit characters.
.PP
The
.B \-s
flag is used to modify the size of the batches. By default, the
batch size is 50,000 bytes.
.PP
The 
.B \-i
flag says to send a batch of Message-IDs with the 
.I ihave
protocol.
.PP
The
.B \-o
flag is used with the 
.B \-c
flag to produce and old style compress batch suitable for systems
with version 2.10.2 news.
.PP
The
.B \-bBC
flags are passed directly to compress and may be used to change
its compression algorithms if necessary.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
To send to a PDP 11/70 running 2.10.2 compressed batching:
.ti 1i
sendbatch  \-c \-C \-b12 -o sitename
.PP
To send to a VAX running 2.11 compressed batching:
.ti 1i
sendbatch \-c sitename
.PP
To send to a VAX over an X.25 network using batches of 30,000 bytes:
.ti 1i
sendbatch \-c7 \-s30000 sitename
.PP
To send to a Sun running 2.11 compressed batching with 
.I ihave/sendme
:
.ti 1i
sendbatch \-c \-i sitename
.SH SEE ALSO
compress(1)
