.\" Copyright (c) 1980, 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)autoconf.4	8.1 (Berkeley) 6/5/93
.\"
.Dd June 5, 1993
.Dt AUTOCONF 4
.Os BSD 4
.Sh NAME
.Nm autoconf
.Nd "diagnostics from the autoconfiguration code"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
When
.Tn UNIX
bootstraps it probes the innards of the machine
on which it is running and
locates controllers, drives, and other devices.
Each item found is recorded on the console.
This procedure is driven by a system
configuration table which is processed by
.Xr config 8
and compiled into each kernel.
.Pp
On the
.Tn VAX ,
devices in
.Tn NEXUS
slots are normally noted, thus memory controllers,
.Tn UNIBUS
and
.Tn MASSBUS
adaptors.  Devices which are not supported which
are found in
.Tn NEXUS
slots are noted also.
The Q-bus on the
.Tn MICROVAX
is configured in the same way as the
.Tn UNIBUS.
.Pp
.Tn MASSBUS
devices are located by a very deterministic procedure since
.Tn MASSBUS
space is completely probe-able.  If devices exist which
are not configured they will be silently ignored; if devices exist of
unsupported type they will be noted.
.Pp
.Tn UNIBUS
devices are located by probing to see if their control-status
registers respond.  If not, they are silently ignored.  If the control
status register responds but the device cannot be made to interrupt,
a diagnostic warning will be printed on the console and the device
will not be available to the system. 
.Pp
Normally, the system uses the disk from which it was loaded as the root
filesystem.
If that is not possible,
a generic system will pick its root device
as the
.Dq best
available device
.Pf ( Tn MASSBUS
disks are better than
.Tn SMD UNIBUS
disks are better than
.Tn RK07 Ns s ;
the device must be drive 0
to be considered).
If such a system is booted with the
.Dv RB_ASKNAME
option (see
.Xr reboot 2 ) ,
then the name of the root device is read from the console terminal at boot
time, and any available device may be used.
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It cpu type %d not configured.
You tried to boot
.Tn UNIX
on a
.Tn CPU
type which it doesn't (or at least this compiled version of
.Tn UNIX
doesn't)
understand.
.Pp
.It mba%d at tr%d.
A
.Tn MASSBUS
adapter was found in
.Ql tr%d
(the
.Tn NEXUS
slot number).
.Tn UNIX
will call it
.Ql mba%d .
.Pp
.It %d mba's not configured.
More
.Tn MASSBUS
adapters were found on
the machine than were declared in the machine configuration; the excess
.Tn MASSBUS
adapters will not be accessible.
.Pp
.It uba%d at tr%d.
A
.Tn UNIBUS
adapter was found in
.Ql tr%d
(the
.Tn NEXUS
slot number).
.Tn UNIX
will call it
.Ql uba%d .
.Pp
.It dr32 unsupported (at tr %d).
A
.Tn DR Ns 32
interface was found in
a
.Tn NEXUS ,
for which
.Tn UNIX
does not have a driver.
.Pp
.It ci unsupported (at tr %d).
A
.Tn CI
interface was found in
a
.Tn NEXUS ,
for which
.Tn UNIX
does not have a driver.
.Pp
.It mcr%d at tr%d.
A memory controller was found in
.Ql tr%d
(the
.Tn NEXUS
slot number).
.Tn UNIX
will call it
.Ql mcr%d .
.Pp
.It 5 mcr's unsupported.
.Tn UNIX
supports only 4 memory controllers
per
.Tn CPU .
.Pp
.It mpm unsupported (at tr%d).
Multi-port memory is unsupported
in the sense that
.Tn UNIX
does not know how to poll it for
.Tn ECC
errors.
.Pp
.It %s%d at mba%d drive %d.
A tape formatter or a disk was found
on the
.Tn MASSBUS ;
for disks
.Ql %s%d
will look like
.Dq Li hp0 ,
for tape formatters
like
.Dq Li ht1 .
The drive number comes from the unit plug on the drive
or in the
.Tn TM
formatter
.Pf ( Em not
on the tape drive; see below).
.Pp
.It %s%d at %s%d slave %d.
(For
.Tn MASSBUS
devices).
Which would look like
.Dq Li tu0 at ht0 slave 0 ,
where
.Dq Li tu0
is the name for the tape device and
.Dq Li ht0
is the name
for the formatter.  A tape slave was found on the tape formatter at the
indicated drive number (on the front of the tape drive).
.Ux
will call the device, e.g.,
.Dq Li tu0 .
.Pp
.It "%s%d at uba%d csr %o vec %o ipl %x."
The device
.Ql %s%d ,
e.g.
.Dq Li dz0
was found on
.Ql uba%d
at control-status register address
.Ql \&%o
and with
device vector
.Ql \&%o .
The device interrupted at priority level
.Ql \&%x .
.Pp
.It %s%d at uba%d csr %o zero vector.
The device did not present
a valid interrupt vector, rather presented 0 (a passive release condition)
to the adapter.
.Pp
.It %s%d at uba%d csr %o didn't interrupt.
The device did not interrupt,
likely because it is broken, hung, or not the kind of device it is advertised
to be.
.Pp
.It %s%d at %s%d slave %d.
(For UNIBUS devices).
Which would look like 
.Dq Li up0 at sc0 slave 0 ,
where
.Dq Li up0
is the name of a disk drive and
.Dq Li sc0
is the name
of the controller.  Analogous to
.Tn MASSBUS
case.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr boot 8 ,
.Xr config 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
feature
appeared in
.Bx 4.1 .
