.\" Copyright (c) 1980 Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.  The Berkeley software License Agreement
.\" specifies the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.\"
.\"	@(#)dn.4	4.1 (Berkeley) %G%
.\"
.TH DN 4 12/2/81
.UC 4
.SH NAME
dn \- dn-11 automatic calling unit interface
.SH SYNOPSIS
device dn0 at uba0 csr 0175200 vector dnintr
.SH DESCRIPTION
A dn-11 is a controller for an automatic calling unit (ACU).
With a dn-11, a call unit, and a modem
a computer may dial a telephone number and establish a data link.
Hardware supporting this interface includes the DEC DN11 and Able
Quadracall controllers working with either Bell 801 or Racal/Vadic
801 or 811 call units.
.PP
A dn-11 interface can control as many as four call units.
In normal operation
a data link is established by opening the file associated with
a call unit, sending the desired phone number in a single
.IR write (2)
operation, then opening the terminal line attached to the appropriate
outgoing modem.  If the phone call was successful and the remote host
presented a carrier signal, the open on the terminal line should be
successful.  At this point the call unit should be closed and a link
has been established.  This sequence is normally performed for the user
by one of 
.IR cu (1),
.IR uucp (1),
or
.IR dnd (8).
.PP
Each controller/call unit pair has different programming 
characteristics which
impact the programmer; the dn-11 interface presents a
.I "raw interface"
rather than imbed local dependencies in the device driver.  For
example, the Racal/Vadic 811 call unit is multiplexed,
providing the user with the ability to place phones calls on as many as
64 separate phone lines from a single interface.  This multiplexing
is carried out based on the first two digits of the phone number presented
by the user (the first digit selects the modem's rack and modem type, while
the second digit selects the specific modem in the rack).
.PP
The legal dn-11 dial codes are: \fB0-9\fP, \fB*\fP (\fB:\fP is a synonym),
\fB#\fP (\fB;\fP is a synonym), \fB=\fP (\fBw\fP is a synonym), and \fB\-\fP.
A phone number may optionally be terminated with a \fB<\fP or \fBe\fP.
Phone numbers may be no more than 40 characters long.
.PP
By convention /dev/cu[al]0 are connected to a 300 baud interface, while
/dev/cu[al]1 provides a 1200 baud interface.
.SH FILES
.DT
/dev/cua[0-9]	ACU interfaces
.br
/dev/cul[0-9]	associated outgoing terminal line
.SH "SEE ALSO"
rv(4)
