.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)pcl.4	8.1 (Berkeley) 6/5/93
.\"
.Dd June 5, 1993
.Dt PCL 4 vax
.Os BSD 4.2
.Sh NAME
.Nm pcl
.Nd
.Tn DEC CSS
.Tn PCL-11 B
Network Interface
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device pcl0 at uba? csr 164200 vector pclxint pclrint"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The 
.Nm pcl
device provides an
.Tn IP Ns -only
interface to the
.Tn DEC CSS
.Tn PCL-11
time division multiplexed network bus.
The controller itself is not accessible to users.
.Pp
The hosts's address is specified with the
.Dv SIOCSIFADDR
.Xr ioctl 2 .
The interface will not transmit or receive any data before
its address is defined.
.Pp
As the
.Tn PCL-11
hardware is only capable of having 15 interfaces per network,
a single-byte host-on-network number is used, with range [1..15] to match
the
.Tn TDM
bus addresses of the interfaces.
.Pp
The interface currently only supports the Internet protocol family
and only provides
.Dq natural
(header) encapsulation.
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It pcl%d: can't init.
Insufficient
.Tn UNIBUS
resources existed to initialize the device.
This is likely to occur when the device is run on a buffered
data path on an 11/750 and other network interfaces are also
configured to use buffered data paths, or when it is configured
to use buffered data paths on an 11/730 (which has none).
.Pp
.It pcl%d: can't handle af%d.
The interface was handed a message with addresses formatted in an
unsuitable address family;  the packet was dropped.
.Pp
.It pcl%d: stray xmit interrupt.
An interrupt occurred when no output had previously been started.
.Pp
.It pcl%d: master.
The
.Tn TDM
bus had no station providing ``bus master'' timing signals,
so this interface has assumed the ``master'' role.  This message should
only appear at most once per
.Tn UNIBUS INIT
on a single system.
Unless there is a hardware failure, only one station may be master at at time.
.Pp
.It pcl%d: send error, tcr=%b, tsr=%b.
The device indicated a problem sending data on output.
If a ``receiver offline'' error is detected, it is not normally logged
unless the option
.Dv PCL_TESTING
has been selected, as this causes a lot
of console chatter when sending to a down machine.  However, this option
is quite useful when debugging problems with the
.Tn PCL
interfaces.
.Pp
.It pcl%d: rcv error, rcr=%b rsr=%b.
The device indicated a problem receiving data on input.
.Pp
.It pcl%d: bad len=%d.
An input operation resulted in a data transfer of less than
0 or more than 1008 bytes of
data into memory (according to the word count register).
This should never happen as the maximum size of a
.Tn PCL
message
has been agreed upon to be 1008 bytes (same as ArpaNet message).
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr inet 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
interface appeared in
.Bx 4.2 .
