.\" Copyright (c) 1983 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms are permitted provided
.\" that: (1) source distributions retain this entire copyright notice and
.\" comment, and (2) distributions including binaries display the following
.\" acknowledgement:  ``This product includes software developed by the
.\" University of California, Berkeley and its contributors'' in the
.\" documentation or other materials provided with the distribution and in
.\" all advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software.
.\" Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors may
.\" be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\" specific prior written permission.
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'' AND WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.\"
.\"	@(#)qe.4	6.3 (Berkeley) 6/23/90
.\"
.TH QE 4 "June 23, 1990"
.UC 6
.SH NAME
qe \- DEC DEQNA Q-bus 10 Mb/s Ethernet interface
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B "device qe0 at uba? csr 174440 vector qeintr"
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B qe
interface provides access to a 10 Mb/s Ethernet network through
the DEC DEQNA Q-bus controller.
.PP
Each of the host's network addresses
is specified at boot time with an SIOCSIFADDR
ioctl.  The
.B qe
interface employs the address resolution protocol described in
arp(4)
to map dynamically  between Internet and Ethernet addresses on the local
network.
.PP
The interface normally tries to use a ``trailer'' encapsulation
to minimize copying data on input and output.
The use of trailers is negotiated with ARP.
This negotiation may be disabled, on a per-interface basis,
by setting the IFF_NOTRAILERS
flag with an SIOCSIFFLAGS ioctl.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
netintro(4), inet(4), arp(4)
