.\" Copyright (c) 1980, 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" %sccs.include.redist.man%
.\"
.\"     @(#)ts.4	8.1 (Berkeley) %G%
.\"
.Dd 
.Dt TS 4 vax
.Os BSD 4
.Sh NAME
.Nm ts
.Nd
.Tn TS-11
magtape interface
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "controller zs0 at uba? csr 0172520 vector tsintr"
.Cd "tape ts0 at zs0 drive 0"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Tn TS-11
combination provides a standard tape drive
interface as described in
.Xr mtio 4 .
The
.Tn TS-11
operates only at 1600
.Tn BPI ,
and only one transport
is possible per controller.
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It ts%d: no write ring.
An attempt was made to write on the tape drive
when no write ring was present; this message is written on the terminal of
the user who tried to access the tape.
.Pp
.It ts%d: not online.
An attempt was made to access the tape while it
was offline; this message is written on the terminal of the user
who tried to access the tape.
.Pp
.It ts%d: hard error bn%d xs0=%b.
A hard error occurred on the tape
at block
.Em bn ;
status register 0 is printed in octal and symbolically
decoded as bits.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr mt 1 ,
.Xr tar 1 ,
.Xr tp 1 ,
.Xr mtio 4 ,
.Xr ht 4 ,
.Xr tm 4 ,
.Xr mt 4 ,
.Xr ut 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver appeared in
.Bx 4.1 .
.Sh BUGS
May hang ungracefully if a physical error (non-data) occurs.
.Pp
The device lives at the same address as a
.Tn TM-11
.Pq Xr tm 4 ;
as it is very difficult to get this device to interrupt, a generic
system assumes that a
.Nm ts
is present whenever no
.Tn TM-11
exists but
the
.Tn CSR
responds and a
.Tn TS-11
is configured.
This does no harm as long as a non-existent
.Tn TS-11
is not accessed.
