.\" Copyright (c) 1980 Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.  The Berkeley software License Agreement
.\" specifies the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.\"
.\"	@(#)up.4	4.1 (Berkeley) %G%
.\"
.TH UP 4 5/10/81
.UC 4
.SH NAME
up \- unibus storage module controller/drives
.SH SYNOPSIS
controller sc0 at uba? csr 0176700 vector upintr
.br
disk up0 at sc0 drive 0
.SH DESCRIPTION
This is a generic UNIBUS storage module disk driver.
It is specifically designed to work with the Emulex SC-21 controller
and Ampex or CDC 300M or Fujitsu 160M drives.  It can be easily
adapted to other drives and controllers (although bootstrapping will
not necessarily be directly possible.)
.PP
Files with minor device numbers 0 through 7 refer to various portions
of drive 0;
minor devices 8 through 15 refer to drive 1, etc.
The standard device names begin with ``up'' followed by
the drive number and then a letter a-h for partitions 0-7 respectively.
The character ? stands here for a drive number in the range 0-7.
.PP
The origin and size of the pseudo-disks on each drive are
as follows:
.PP
.nf
.ta .5i +\w'000000    'u +\w'000000    'u +\w'000000    'u
AMPEX/CDC 300M drive partitions:
	disk	start	length	cyl
	up?a	0	15884	0-26
	up?b	16416	33440	27-81
	up?c	0	495520	0-814
	up?d	341696	15884	562-588
	up?e	358112	55936	589-680
	up?f	414048	81472	681-814
	up?g	341696	153824	562-814
	up?h	49856	291346	82-561
.PP
FUJITSU 160M drive partitions:
	disk	start	length	cyl
	up?a	0	15884	0-49
	up?b	16000	33440	50-154
	up?c	0	263360	0-822
	up?h	49600	213760	155-822
.DT
.fi
.PP
It is unwise for all of these files to be present in one installation,
since there is overlap in addresses and protection becomes
a sticky matter.
The up?a partition is normally used for the root file system,
the up?b partition as a paging area,
and the up?c partition for pack-pack copying (it maps the entire disk).
On 160M drives the up?h partition maps the rest of the pack.
On 300M drives both up?g and up?h are used to map the
remaining cylinders.
.PP
The block files access the disk via the system's normal
buffering mechanism and may be read and written without regard to
physical disk records.  There is also a `raw' interface
which provides for direct transmission between the disk
and the user's read or write buffer.
A single read or write call results in exactly one I/O operation
and therefore raw I/O is considerably more efficient when
many words are transmitted.  The names of the raw files
conventionally begin with an extra `r.'
.PP
In raw I/O counts should be a multiple of 512 bytes (a disk sector).
Likewise
.I seek
calls should specify a multiple of 512 bytes.
.SH FILES
/dev/up[0-7][a-h]	block files
.br
/dev/rup[0-7][a-h]	raw files
.SH SEE ALSO
hk(4), hp(4)
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
\fBup%d%c: hard error sn%d cs2=%b er1=%b er2=%b\fR.  An unrecoverable
error occured during transfer of the specified sector of the specified
disk partition.  The contents of the cs2, er1 and er2 registers are printed
in octal and symbolically with bits decoded.
The error was either unrecoverable, or a large number of retry attempts
(including offset positioning and drive recalibration) could not
recover the error.
.PP
\fBup%d: write locked\fR.  The write protect switch was set on the drive
when a write was attempted.  The write operation is not recoverable.
.PP
\fBup%d: not ready\fR.  The drive was spun down or off line when it was
accessed.  The i/o operation is not recoverable.
.PP
\fBup%d: not ready (came back!)\fR.  The drive was not ready, but after
printing the message about being not ready (which takes a fraction
of a second) was ready.  The operation is recovered if no further
errors occur.
.PP
\fBup%d%c: soft ecc sn%d\fR.  A recoverable ECC error occurred on the
specified sector of the specified disk partition.  This happens normally
a few times a week.  If it happens more frequently than
this the sectors where the errors are occuring should be checked to see
if certain cylinders on the pack, spots on the carriage of the drive
or heads are indicated.
.PP
\fBsc%d: lost interrupt\fR.  A timer watching the controller detecting
no interrupt for an extended period while an operation was outstanding.
This indicates a hardware or software failure.  There is currently a
hardware/software problem with spinning down drives while they are
being accessed which causes this error to occur.
The error causes a UNIBUS reset, and retry of the pending operations.
If the controller continues to lose interrupts, this error will recur
a few seconds later.
.SH BUGS
In raw I/O
.I read
and
.IR write (2)
truncate file offsets to 512-byte block boundaries,
and
.I write
scribbles on the tail of incomplete blocks.
Thus,
in programs that are likely to access raw devices,
.I read, write
and
.IR lseek (2)
should always deal in 512-byte multiples.
.PP
DEC-standard error logging and bad block forwarding should be supported;
the code to do this could be easily incorporated from the
.IR hp (4)
driver.  All that would be needed then would be a stand-alone formatting
program to detect the bad sectors, format the disk so that the sectors
were marked bad and initialize the bad sector files.
.PP
A program to analyze the logged error information (even in its
present reduced form) is needed.
.PP
The partition tables for the file systems should be read off of each
pack, as they are never quite what any single installation would prefer,
and this would make packs more portable.
