.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)vv.4	8.1 (Berkeley) 6/5/93
.\"
.Dd June 5, 1993
.Dt VV 4 vax
.Os BSD 4.2
.Sh NAME
.Nm vv
.Nd Proteon proNET 10 Megabit ring
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device vv0 at uba0 csr 0161000 vector vvrint vvxint"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm vv
interface provides access to a 10 Mb/s Proteon
.Tn proNET
ring network.
.Pp
The network address of the interface must be specified with an
an
.Dv SIOCSIFADDR
.Xr ioctl 2
before data can be transmitted or received.
It is only permissible to change the network address while the
interface is marked
.Dq down .
.Pp
The host's hardware address is discovered by putting the interface in
digital loopback mode (not joining the ring) and sending a broadcast
packet from which the hardware address is extracted.
.Pp
Transmit timeouts are detected through use of a watchdog routine.
Lost input interrupts are checked for when packets are sent out.
.Pp
If the installation is running
.Tn CTL
boards which use the old broadcast
address of
.Ql 0
instead of the new address of
.Ql 0xff ,
the define
.Dv OLD_BROADCAST
should be specified in the driver.
.Pp
The driver can use
.Dq trailer
encapsulation to minimize copying
data on input and output.
This may be disabled, on a per-interface basis,
by setting the
.Dv IFF_NOTRAILERS
flag with an
.Dv SIOCSIFFLAGS 
.Xr ioctl .
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It vv%d: host %d.
The software announces the host
address discovered during autoconfiguration.
.Pp
.It vv%d: can't initialize.
The software was unable to
discover the address of this interface, so it deemed
"dead" will not be enabled.
.Pp
.It vv%d: error vvocsr=%b.
The hardware indicated an error on
the previous transmission.
.Pp
.It vv%d: output timeout.
The token timer has fired and the
token will be recreated.
.Pp
.It vv%d: error vvicsr=%b.
The hardware indicated an error
in reading a packet off the ring.
.Pp
.It en%d: can't handle af%d.
The interface was handed
a message with addresses formatted in an unsuitable address
family; the packet was dropped.
.Pp
.It vv%d: vs_olen=%d.
The ring output routine has been
handed a message with a preposterous length.  This results in
an immediate 
.Em panic: vs_olen .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr inet 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver appeared in
.Bx 4.2 .
.Sh BUGS
The encapsulation of trailer packets in the
.Bx 4.2
version of this driver
was incorrect (the packet type was in
.Tn VAX
byte order).
As a result, the trailer encapsulation in this version is not compatible
with the
.Bx 4.2
.Tn VAX
version.
