.\"$Header: ibm5151.4,v 10.1 86/11/19 10:55:38 jg Exp $
.\"$Source: /u1/X/libibm/doc/man/RCS/ibm5151.4,v $
.\" This file uses -man macros.
.TH IBM5151 4 "31 Mar 1986" "Space overwritten by .AC macro" " "
.UC 4
.AC 1 0 
.SH NAME
ibm5151, mono \- IBM 5151 Monochrome Display interface
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B "pseudo-device mono"
.SH DESCRIPTION
The monochrome display is a standard IBM Personal Computer AT 
Monochrome Display and
display adapter.
The display adapter is accessed through a memory-mapped I/O address space.
The display buffer is at address 0xf40b0000.
Opening 
.I /dev/mono
grants direct access to the display buffer and the 
monochrome registers in the I/O map.
The registers are at the addresses
given in the IBM PC/AT Technical Reference Manual, offset by 0xf0000000.
.PP
Each character on the display has two bytes in the buffer; one contains the
character, the other the attributes. The attributes available are reverse
video, intense mode, blink mode and underline mode. These are available
through escape sequences sent to the display (see below).
All other functions are provided through software terminal emulation, 
including either 24-line (plus status) mode or 25-line mode, 
forward and reverse
scrolling and cursor positioning.
.PP
The escape sequences recognized by the display software, from
the termcap entry (in 
.IR /etc/termcap ) 
for ``ibmmono'', are as follows:
.nf
	<Esc>-<A>		Cursor up
	<Esc>-<C>		Non-destructive space
	<Esc>-<H>		Home cursor
	<Esc>-<I>		Clear to end of line
	<Esc>-<J>		Clear to end of screen
	<Esc>-<K>		Clear screen
	<Esc>-<L>		Insert line
	<Esc>-<M>		Delete line
	<Esc>-<W>		Start underline
	<Esc>-<Y>		X Y position cursor
	<Esc>-<Z>		High intensity
	<Esc>-<j>		Save cursor position
	<Esc>-<k>		Restore cursor position
	<Esc>-<p>		Stand out
	<Esc>-<q>		Stand out end
	<Esc>-<s>		Status line on/off
	<Esc>-<w>		Stop underline
	<Esc>-<z>		Low intensity
.fi
.PP
These escape sequences are a superset of the ones recognized by IBM 3101
display.
.SH FILES
/dev/console
.br
/dev/mono
.SH "SEE ALSO"
cons(4), ibm6153(4), ibm6155(4), ibmaed(4), keyboard(4), tty(4)
.br
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
None.
.SH BUGS
Access to the PC/AT I/O and memory busses through 
.I /dev/mono
is not limited to the monochrome addresses.
.PP
There should be separate escape sequences to turn the status line on
and off.
