.\" $Id: tcsh.man,v 3.26 1991/12/19 21:40:06 christos Exp $
.TH TCSH 1 "19 December 1991" "Cornell"
.SH NAME
tcsh \- C shell with file name completion and command line editing
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B tcsh 
[ 
.B \-bcdefFilmnqstvVxX 
.B \-Dname[=value]
] 
[ 
.I argument .\|.\|.  
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Tcsh
is an enhanced version of the Berkeley UNIX C shell
.IR csh (1).
It behaves exactly like the C shell,
except for the added utilities of:
.sp
.RS +.6i
.ti -4
1)  Command line editing using Emacs-style commands.
.sp
.ti -4
2)  Visual step up/down through the history list.
.sp
.ti -4
3)  Terminal mode sanity checking and resetting.
.sp
.ti -4
4)  Interactive command, file name and user name completion.
.sp
.ti -4
5)  File/directory/user list in the middle of a typed command.
.sp
.ti -4
6)  Spelling correction of command, file, and user names.
.sp
.ti -4
7)  Lookup of command documentation in the middle of a typed command.
.sp
.ti -4
8)  Enhanced history mechanism.
.sp
.ti -4
9)  Automatic locking/logout after long periods of idle time.
.sp
.ti -4
10) Automatic execution of a single command prior to printing each prompt.
.sp
.ti -4
11) Automatic periodic command execution.
.sp
.ti -4
12) A new syntax for the prompt, and the ability to set the prompt for
"while" and "for" loops.
.sp
.ti -4
13) Time stamps in the history list.
.sp
.ti -4
14) An addition to the syntax of filenames to access entries in the
directory stack, and the ability treat symbolic links in a sane
way when changing directories.
.sp
.ti -4
15) The ability to watch for logins and logouts by user or terminal
on the machine.
.sp
.ti -4
16) A scheduled event list, which specifies commands which are to be
executed at given times.
.sp
.ti -4
17) A new builtin that does a subset of
.IR ls (1).
.sp
.ti -4
18) An addition to the file expression syntax for a character not
in a set of characters and the ability to negate a globbing pattern.
.sp
.ti -4
19) New automatically initialized environment variables \fIHOST\fR and
\fIHOSTTYPE\fR.
.sp
.ti -4
20) Commands for debugging terminal capabilities.
.sp
.ti -4
21) Searching for the visual history mechanism.
.sp
.ti -4
22) New builtins for the
.IR which (1) 
and
.IR where
commands.
.sp
.ti -4
23) Restarting a stopped editor with two keystrokes.
.sp
.ti -4
24) Status line support
.sp
.ti -4
25) Automatic execution of a command when the current working
directory is changed.
.sp
.ti -4
26) Native Language System support.
.sp
.ti -4
27) Automatic process time reporting.
.sp
.ti -4
28) OS Dependent Builtin Support
.sp
.ti -4
29) Automatic window size adjustment
.sp
.ti -4
30) Input files
.sp
.ti -4
31) Additional/Undocumented Options
.sp
.ti -4
32) Enhanced history/variable modifier expansion
.RE
.sp
For a description of standard C-shell features, see the
.I csh
manual page.
.PP
.SH "1. COMMAND LINE EDITING"
Commands that the user types in may be edited using the same control
characters that Gnu Emacs or vi uses.  Arrow and function key sequences are
also allowed.
.I Tcsh
allows this by setting the terminal to `CBREAK' mode and reading the input
one character at a time.
.PP
There is a new shell command, 
.I bindkey,
that allows the user to redefine what any key does, or find out what
any or all of the keys do.
.PP
Syntax: bindkey [ -a ] [ -c ] [ -s ] [ -v ] [ -e ] [ -d ] [ -l ] [ -r ] [ -- ] [ in-string [ out-string | command ]]
.PP
If no values are given all bindings are listed. If only in-string is given,
bindings for the in-string is listed.
.PP
Otherwise it binds the in-string to the given out-string or command.
If out-string, this is treated as input to 
.I tcsh 
when in-string is typed. This may be used recursively to currently a level 
of 10 deep.
.PP
There are two basic key maps: the normal and alternative one. The alternative 
is used by VI command mode. For multi-character input the basic key maps
contains a sequence-lead-in for the first character in the input.
.PP
Options:
    -a    bind in-string in alternative key map.
.br
    -s    bind an out-string instead of a command
.br
    -c    bind a unix command instead of a command
.br
    -v    bind for default VI-mode
.br
    -e    bind for default emacs-mode
.br
    -d    bind to compiled in default
.br
    -l    list functions available with short description
.br
    -r    remove the binding of in-string
.PP
In strings control characters may be written as caret-<letter> and
backslash ("\e") is used to escape a character as follows:
.RS
.PD 0
.TP
.B \ea
bell character
.TP
.B \en
line feed (new line)
.TP
.B \eb
back space
.TP 
.B \et
horizontal tab
.TP  
.B \ev
vertical tab
.TP   
.B \ef
form feed
.TP    
.B \er
carriage return
.TP     
.B \ee
escape
.TP
.B \ennn
character code in octal
.PD
.RE
In all other cases \e escapes the following character. Needed for
escaping the special meaning of \e and ^.
Delete is written as "^?" (caret-question mark).
.PP
.I Tcsh 
always binds the arrow keys as defined by the termcap entry to:
.RS +.6i
.nf
.ta 1.5i
.sp
up arrow	up-history
down arrow	down-history
right arrow	forward-char
left arrow	backward-char
.RE
.DT
.fi
.sp
except where these bindings would alter other single character bindings.
If this is not desired one can avoid the automatic arrow key binding using
.I settc 
to change the arrow key escape sequences to the empty string.
The ansi/vt100 sequences for arrow keys are always bound.
.PP
The following is a list of the default emacs and vi bindings.
Characters with the 8th bit set are written as M-<character>.
Note however, that unlike with the old
.I bind
command (see below), the syntax M-<character> has no special meaning to the
.I bindkey
command, and the bindings for the sequence escape+<character> and 
M-<character> as given below are handled separately (although the
the default bindings are the same).
The printable ascii characters not mentioned in the list are bound to the
.I self-insert-command
function, which just inserts the given character literally into the input line.
The remaining characters are bound to the
.I undefined-key
function, which only causes a beep (unless
.I nobeep
is set, of course).
.RS +.6i
.nf
.ta 2.5i
.sp
EMACS bindings
.sp
"^@"	->  set-mark-command
"^A"	->  beginning-of-line
"^B"	->  backward-char
"^C"	->  tty-sigintr
"^D"	->  delete-char-or-list
"^E"	->  end-of-line
"^F"	->  forward-char
"^G"	->  is undefined
"^H"	->  backward-delete-char
"^I"	->  complete-word
"^J"	->  newline
"^K"	->  kill-line
"^L"	->  clear-screen
"^M"	->  newline
"^N"	->  down-history
"^O"	->  tty-flush-output
"^P"	->  up-history
"^Q"	->  tty-start-output
"^R"	->  redisplay
"^S"	->  tty-stop-output
"^T"	->  transpose-chars
"^U"	->  kill-whole-line
"^V"	->  quoted-insert
"^W"	->  kill-region
"^X"	->  sequence-lead-in
"^Y"	->  yank
"^Z"	->  tty-sigtsusp
"^["	->  sequence-lead-in
"^\e"	->  tty-sigquit
"^]"	->  tty-dsusp
" " to "/"	->  self-insert-command
"0"  to "9"	->  digit
":"  to "~"	->  self-insert-command
"^?"	->  backward-delete-char
.PP
EMACS Multi-character and 8 bit bindings
.sp
"^[^D" or "M-^D"	->  list-choices
"^[^H" or "M-^H"	->  backward-delete-word
"^[^I" or "M-^I"	->  complete-word
"^[^L" or "M-^L"	->  clear-screen
"^[^Z" or "M-^Z"	->  run-fg-editor
"^[^[" or "M-^["	->  complete-word
"^[^_" or "M-^_"	->  copy-prev-word
"^[ "  or "M- "	->  expand-history
"^[!"  or "M-!"	->  expand-history
"^[$"  or "M-$"	->  spell-line
"^[0"  or "M-0"	->  digit-argument
"^[1"  or "M-1"	->  digit-argument
"^[2"  or "M-2"	->  digit-argument
"^[3"  or "M-3"	->  digit-argument
"^[4"  or "M-4"	->  digit-argument
"^[5"  or "M-5"	->  digit-argument
"^[6"  or "M-6"	->  digit-argument
"^[7"  or "M-7"	->  digit-argument
"^[8"  or "M-8"	->  digit-argument
"^[9"  or "M-9"	->  digit-argument
"^[?"  or "M-?"	->  which-command
"^[B"  or "M-B"	->  backward-word
"^[C"  or "M-C"	->  capitalize-word
"^[D"  or "M-D"	->  delete-word
"^[F"  or "M-F"	->  forward-word
"^[H"  or "M-H"	->  run-help
"^[L"  or "M-L"	->  downcase-word
"^[N"  or "M-N"	->  history-search-forward
"^[P"  or "M-P"	->  history-search-backward
"^[R"  or "M-R"	->  toggle-literal-history
"^[S"  or "M-S"	->  spell-word
"^[U"  or "M-U"	->  upcase-word
"^[W"  or "M-W"	->  copy-region-as-kill
"^[_"  or "M-_"	->  insert-last-word
"^[b"  or "M-b"	->  backward-word
"^[c"  or "M-c"	->  capitalize-word
"^[d"  or "M-d"	->  delete-word
"^[f"  or "M-f"	->  forward-word
"^[h"  or "M-h"	->  run-help
"^[l"  or "M-l"	->  downcase-word
"^[n"  or "M-n"	->  history-search-forward
"^[p"  or "M-p"	->  history-search-backward
"^[r"  or "M-r"	->  toggle-literal-history
"^[s"  or "M-s"	->  spell-word
"^[u"  or "M-u"	->  upcase-word
"^[w"  or "M-w"	->  copy-region-as-kill
"^[^?" or "M-^?"	->  backward-delete-word
"^X^X"	->  exchange-point-and-mark
"^X*"	->  expand-glob
"^X$"	->  expand-variables
"^XG"	->  list-glob
"^Xg"	->  list-glob
"^Xn	->  normalize-path
"^XN	->  normalize-path
.sp
.PP
VI Insert Mode functions
.sp
"^@"	->  is undefined
"^A"	->  beginning-of-line
"^B"	->  backward-char
"^C"	->  tty-sigintr
"^D"	->  list-or-eof
"^E"	->  end-of-line
"^F"	->  forward-char
"^G"	->  list-glob
"^H"	->  backward-delete-char
"^I"	->  complete-word
"^J"	->  newline
"^K"	->  kill-line
"^L"	->  clear-screen
"^M"	->  newline
"^N"	->  down-history
"^O"	->  tty-flush-output
"^P"	->  up-history
"^Q"	->  tty-start-output
"^R"	->  redisplay
"^S"	->  tty-stop-output
"^T"	->  transpose-chars
"^U"	->  backward-kill-line
"^V"	->  quoted-insert
"^W"	->  backward-delete-word
"^X"	->  expand-line
"^Y"	->  tty-dsusp
"^Z"	->  tty-sigtsusp
"^["	->  vi-cmd-mode
"^\e"	->  tty-sigquit
" " to "~"	->  self-insert-command
"^?"	->  backward-delete-char
.PP
VI Command Mode functions
.sp
"^@"	->  is undefined
"^A"	->  beginning-of-line
"^B"	->  is undefined
"^C"	->  tty-sigintr
"^D"	->  list-choices
"^E"	->  end-of-line
"^F"	->  is undefined
"^G"	->  list-glob
"^H"	->  backward-char
"^I"	->  vi-cmd-mode-complete
"^J"	->  newline
"^K"	->  kill-line
"^L"	->  clear-screen
"^M"	->  newline
"^N"	->  down-history
"^O"	->  tty-flush-output
"^P"	->  up-history
"^Q"	->  tty-start-output
"^R"	->  redisplay
"^S"	->  tty-stop-output
"^T"	->  is undefined
"^U"	->  backward-kill-line
"^V"	->  is undefined
"^W"	->  backward-delete-word
"^X"	->  expand-line
"^["	->  sequence-lead-in
"^\e"	->  tty-sigquit
" "	->  forward-char
"!"	->  expand-history
"$"	->  end-of-line
"*"	->  expand-glob
"+"	->  down-history
";"	->  vi-repeat-char-fwd
","	->  vi-repeat-char-back
"-"	->  up-history
"."	->  is undefined
"/"	->  vi-search-back
"0"	->  vi-zero
"1" to "9"	->  digit-argument
"?"	->  vi-search-fwd
"@"	->  is undefined
"A"	->  vi-add-at-eol
"B"	->  vi-word-back
"C"	->  change-till-end-of-line
"D"	->  kill-line
"E"	->  vi-endword
"F"	->  vi-char-back
"I"	->  vi-insert-at-bol
"J"	->  history-search-forward
"K"	->  history-search-backward
"N"	->  vi-search-back
"O"	->  sequence-lead-in
"R"	->  vi-replace-mode
"S"	->  vi-substitute-line
"T"	->  vi-charto-back
"U"	->  is undefined
"V"	->  expand-variables
"W"	->  vi-word-fwd
"X"	->  backward-delete-char
"["	->  sequence-lead-in
"\e^"	->  beginning-of-line
"a"	->  vi-add
"b"	->  backward-word
"c"	->  is undefined
"d"	->  vi-delmeta
"e"	->  vi-eword
"f"	->  vi-char-fwd
"h"	->  backward-char
"i"	->  vi-insert
"j"	->  down-history
"k"	->  up-history
"l"	->  forward-char
"m"	->  is undefined
"n"	->  vi-search-fwd
"r"	->  vi-replace-char
"s"	->  vi-substitute-char
"t"	->  vi-charto-fwd
"u"	->  vi-undo
"v"	->  expand-variables
"w"	->  vi-beginning-of-next-word
"x"	->  delete-char
"~"	->  change-case
"^?"	->  backward-delete-char
"M-?"	->  run-help
"M-["	->  sequence-lead-in
"M-O"	->  sequence-lead-in
.PP
VI Multi-character bindings
.sp
"^[?"	->  run-help
.RE
.DT
.fi
.sp
.PP
In 
.I tcsh
there are two input modes: 
.I insert
and
.I overwrite.
All characters that are bound to the 
.I self-insert-command
either get inserted or overwrite what was under the cursor depending
on the input mode. In emacs one can toggle between modes using
the
.I overwrite-mode
function, and in VI one can use any of the replace mode commands.
By default the mode is preserved between input lines. To specify
a default mode that can be enforced at the beginning of each command line,
the variable 
.I inputmode
can be set
to either
.I insert
or 
.I overwrite.
.PP
There is also an older version of bindkey called 
.I bind,
that allows the user to redefine what any key does, or find out what
any or all of the keys do. This is retained for compatibility reasons.
.PP
If given two arguments 
.I bind
binds the function (first argument) to the given key (second
argument).  The key may be: the direct character or a caret-<letter>
combination, which is converted to control-<letter>; M-<letter> for an
escaped character; or F-<string> for a function key.  For the last of
these, the function key prefix must be bound to the function
"sequence-lead-in" and the string specified to the
.I bind
command must not include this prefix.
.PP
If given one argument
.I bind
takes the argument as the name for a key and tells what that key does.
As a special case, the user can say
.sp
.RS +.6i
bind emacs
.br
.RE
or
.RS +.6i
bind vi
.RE
.sp
to bind all the keys for Emacs or vi mode respectively.
.PP
If given no arguments
.I bind
tells what all of the keys do.  If you give bind the single argument
of 'defaults', it resets each key to its default value (see the above
list).
.PP
.SH "2. VISUAL HISTORY"
The keys ^P and ^N are used to step up and down the history list.  If
the user has typed in the following:
.RS +.6i
.sp
.nf
> ls
foo	bar
> echo mumble
mumble
>
.RE
.fi
.sp
then enters
.I ^P,
the shell will place "echo mumble" into the editing buffer, and will
put the cursor at the end of the line.  If another
.I ^P
is entered, then the editing line will change to "ls".  More
.IR ^P s
will make the bell ring, since there are no more lines in the history.
.I ^N
works the same way, except it steps down (forward in time).
.PP
An easy way to re-do a command is to type
.I ^P
followed by
.I Return.
Also, pieces of previous commands can be assembled to make a new
command.  The commands that work on regions are especially useful for this.
.PP
.I ^P
and
.I ^N
actually only copy commands from out of the history into the edit
buffer; thus the user may step back into the history and then edit
things, but those changes do not affect what is actually in
.I tcsh 's
history.
.PP
Another way to recall (parts of) history commands is via the 'expand-history'
function. A variation of the 'expand-history' function is called 'magic-space'.
This function expands 
.I csh 
history, and always appends a space. Magic-space
thus can be bound to <space>, to automatically expand 
.I csh 
history.
Expand-history is normally bound to
.I M-<space>
and magic-space is not bound.
.PP
.SH "3. TTY MODE SANITY"
As part of the editor,
.I tcsh
does a check and reset of the terminal mode bits.  If the speed has
been changed, then
.I tcsh
will change to using that speed.
.I Tcsh
will also obey changes in the padding needed by the tty.
Also, the shell will automatically turn off
RAW and CBREAK (on systems that use 
.I termio(7) 
it will turn on ICANON) modes, and will turn on 
the tty driver's output processing (OPOST).
.PP
The list of the tty modes that are always set or cleared by 
.I tcsh 
can be examined and modified using the
.I setty 
builtin.  The
.I setty
display is similar to 
.I stty(1),
and varies depending on the system's tty driver. Modes that 
.I tcsh 
will always try to set are shown as
.I "+mode".
Modes that 
.I tcsh 
will always try to clear are shown as
.I "-mode"
and modes that tcsh will track and allow to be modified are not shown by
default, or if the 
.I "-a"
flag is given, are shown without a leading sign. For tty characters,
.I "-char"
disables the tty character, while 
.I "+char" 
protects the tty character from being changed.
.PP
Setty can be used to control the three different modes 
.I tcsh
uses for the tty. The default mode displayed is the "execute" mode which is 
used when tcsh executes commands. The two other modes are the "edit" mode 
and the "quote" mode. The "edit" mode is used for command line editing, and
the "quote" mode is used when entering literal characters. The "execute" mode
can be specified with
.I "-x",
the "edit" mode with 
.I "-d", 
and the "quote" mode with
.I "-q"
For example if one wants to set the 
.I echok
flag and let the 
.I echoe
pass unchanged:
.sp
.nf
.RS +.6i
> setty 
iflag:-inlcr -igncr +icrnl 
oflag:+opost +onlcr -onlret 
cflag:
lflag:+isig +icanon +echo +echoe -echok -echonl -noflsh 
      +echoctl -flusho +iexten 
chars:
> setty +echok echoe
> setty
iflag:-inlcr -igncr +icrnl 
oflag:+opost +onlcr -onlret 
cflag:
lflag:+isig +icanon +echo +echok -echonl -noflsh +echoctl 
      -flusho +iexten 
chars:
.RE
.fi
.sp
.PP
.SH "4. WORD COMPLETION"
In typing commands,
it is no longer necessary to type a complete name,
only a unique abbreviation is necessary.
When you type a TAB to
.I tcsh
it will complete the name for you, echoing the full name on the
terminal (and entering it into the edit buffer).  If the prefix you
typed matches no name, the terminal bell is rung, unless the
variable 
.I nobeep
is set.  The name may
be partially completed if the prefix matches several longer names.  If
this is the case, the name is extended up to the point of ambiguity,
and the bell is rung.  This works for file names, command names, shell 
variables and the 
.I( csh) 
\~ user name convention.
The variable
.I fignore
may be set to a list of suffixes to be disregarded during completion.
.PP
.I Example
.PP
Assume the current directory contained the files:
.RS +.6i
.sp
.nf
DSC.TXT	bin    	cmd    	lib    	memos
DSC.NEW	chaos  	cmtest 	mail   	netnews
bench  	class  	dev    	mbox   	new
.RE
.fi
.sp
The command:
.sp
.RS +.6i
> gnumacs ch[TAB]
.RE
.sp
would cause 
.I tcsh
to complete the command with the file name chaos.  If instead, the
user had typed:
.sp
.RS +.6i
> gnumacs D[TAB]
.RE
.sp
.I tcsh
would have extended the name to DSC and rung the terminal bell, 
indicating partial completion. However, if 
.I fignore
had previously been set to a list containing .NEW as one element,
e.g. ( .o .NEW ),
.I tcsh
would have completed the `D' to DSC.TXT.
.PP
File name completion works equally well when other directories are addressed.
Additionally, 
.I tcsh 
understands the C shell tilde (~) convention for home directories.
In addition it caches tilde name references for fast access. This cache
can be flushed by using the builtin 
.I rehash.
Thus,
.sp
.RS +.6i
> cd ~speech/data/fr[TAB]
.RE
.sp
does what one might expect.  This may also be used to expand login names only.
Thus,
.sp
.RS +.6i
> cd ~sy[TAB]
.RE
.sp
expands to
.sp
.RS +.6i
> cd ~synthesis
.RE
.sp
.PP
Command names may also be completed, for example,
.sp
.RS +.6i
> gnum[TAB]
.RE
.sp
will expand to "gnumacs" (assuming that there are no other commands
that begin with "gnum").
.sp
Shell and environment variables are recognized also and in addition
they can be expanded:
.sp
.RS +.6i
> set local=/usr/local
.br
> echo $lo[TAB]
.RE
.sp
will expand to "$local/". Note that a slash is appended because the
expanded variable points to a directory. Also:
.sp
.RS +.6i
> set local=/usr/local
.br
> echo $local/[^D]
.br
bin/ etc/ lib/ man/ src/ 
.RE
.sp
will correctly list the contents of /usr/local. Shell and environment
variables can also be expanded via the expand-variables function:
.sp
.RS +.6i
> echo $local/[^X$]
.br
> echo /usr/local/
.RE

.PP
Completion also works when the cursor is in the middle of the line,
rather than just the end.  All of the text after the cursor will be
saved, the completion will work (possibly adding to the current name),
and then the saved text will be restored in place, after the cursor.
.PP
The behavior of the completion can be changed by the setting of
several shell variables:
.PP
Setting the
.I recexact
variable makes an exact command be expanded rather than just ringing the bell.
For example, assume the current directory has two subdirectories
called foo and food, then with
.I recexact
set the following could be done:
.sp
.RS +.6i
> cd fo[TAB]
.RE
.br
to ...
.br
.RS +.6i
> cd foo[TAB]
.RE
.br
to ...
.br
.RS +.6i
> cd foo/
.RE
.sp
rather than beeping on the second TAB.
.PP
If the
.I autolist
variable is set, invoking completion when several choices are possible
will automatically list the choices, effectively merging the functionality
described in the next section into the completion mechanism. If 
.I autolist
is set to "ambiguous", then 
.I tcsh 
will only list the choices if there were no new characters added in the
completion operation.

.PP
The "noise level" can be controlled by the value that
.I matchbeep
is set to: With matchbeep=nomatch, completion will only beep if there are
no matching names; with matchbeep=ambiguous, completion will
.I also
beep if there are many possible matches; with matchbeep=notunique,
completion will
.I also
beep when there is an exact match but there are other, longer, matches
(see recexact).  With matchbeep=never or set to any other value completion 
will never beep. If matchbeep is not set it defaults to ambiguous.
.PP
If the
.I autoexpand
variable is set, the expand-history function will be invoked automatically
before the completion attempt, expanding normal 
.I csh 
history substitutions.
.PP
For covert operation, the variable
.I nobeep
can be set; it will prevent the completion mechanism,
as well as 
.I tcsh 
in general, from actually beeping.
Finally, if the
.I autocorrect
variable is set, the spelling correction is attempted for any path components
up to the completion point.
.PP
.SH "5. LISTING OF POSSIBLE NAMES"
At any point in typing a command, you may request "what names are
available".  Thus, when you have typed, perhaps:
.sp
.RS +.6i
> cd ~speech/data/fritz/
.RE
.sp
you may wish to know what files or subdirectories exist (in
~speech/data/fritz), without, of course, aborting the command you are
typing.  Typing the character Control-D (^D), will list the names
(files, in this case) available.  The files are listed in multicolumn
format, sorted column-wise.  Directories are indicated with a trailing
`/', executable files with a `*', symbolic links with a '@', sockets
with a '=', FIFOs (named pipes) with a '|', character devices
with a '%', and block devices with a '#'.  Once
printed, the command is re-echoed for you to complete.
.PP
Additionally, one may want to know which files match a prefix.
If the user had typed:
.sp
.RS +.6i
> cd ~speech/data/fr[^D]
.RE
.sp
all files and subdirectories whose prefix was
``fr'' would be printed.  Notice that the example before was simply
a degenerate case of this with a null trailing file name. 
(The null string is a prefix of all strings.)
Notice also, that
a trailing slash is required to pass to a new directory for 
both file name completion and listing.
.PP
The degenerate
.sp
.RS +.6i
> ~[^D]
.RE
.sp
will print a full list of login names on the current system.  Note,
however, that the degenerate
.sp
.RS +.6i
> <Spaces>[^D]
.RE
.sp
does not list all of the commands, but only beeps.
.PP
Listing/expanding of words that match a name containing wildcard characters 
can be done via the list-glob/expand-glob function: 
.RS +.6i
.nf
> ls
foo.c  bar.c  a.out
> vi *.c[^Xg]
foo.c bar.c
> vi *.c[^X*]
> vi foo.c bar.c
.fi
.RE
.PP
.SH "Command Name Recognition"
Command name recognition and completion
works in the same manner as file name recognition
and completion above.
The current value of the environment variable
.I PATH
is used
in searching for the command.
For example
.sp
.RS +.6i
> newa[TAB]
.RE
.sp
might expand to
.sp
.RS +.6i
> newaliases
.RE
.sp
Also,
.sp
.RS +.6i
> new[^D]
.RE
.sp
would list all commands (along PATH) that begin with "new".
.PP
Note that Control-D has three different effects on
.I tcsh.
On an empty line (one that contains nothing, not even spaces),
.I ^D
sends an EOF to
.I tcsh
just as it does for normal programs.  When the cursor is in the middle
of a line of text,
.I ^D
deletes the character
that the cursor is under.  Finally, a
.I ^D
at the end of a line of text lists the available names at that point.
To get a list of available names when the cursor is in the middle of a
line (or on an empty line), a Meta-Control-D should be typed (Escape
followed by Control-D).
.PP
.SH "6. SPELLING CORRECTION"
If while typing a command, the user mistypes or misspells a file name,
user name, or command name,
.I tcsh
can correct the spelling.  When correcting a file name, each part of
the path is individually checked and corrected.
Spelling correction can be invoked in several different ways:
.PP
The 
.I spell-word
function, normally bound to M-s (and M-S), will attempt to correct the word
immediately before the cursor.
For example, suppose that
the user has typed:
.sp
.RS +.6i
> cd /uxr/spol/news[ESC s]
.RE
.sp
.I Tcsh
will check the path for spelling, correct the mistakes, and redraw the
line as
.sp
.RS +.6i
> cd /usr/spool/news
.RE
.sp
leaving the cursor at the end of the line.
.PP
Spelling correction of the entire command line (independent of where
the cursor is) can be done with the
.I spell-line
function, normally bound to M-$ (Escape Dollar-sign).
It will check each word independently, but in order to avoid e.g. command
options, no correction is attempted on words whose first character
is found in the string "!.\\^-*%".
.PP
Finally, automatic spelling correction will be done each time the Return
key is hit, if the
.I correct
variable is set to an appropriate value:
correct=cmd will cause the spelling of the command name only to be checked,
while correct=all causes checking of all words on the line, like the
spell-line function.
If any part of the command line is corrected, the user will be given a special
prompt as defined by the
.I prompt3
variable, followed by the corrected line, e.g.
.sp
.RS +.6i
.nf
> lz /usr/bin
CORRECT>ls /usr/bin (y|n|e)?
.fi
.RE
.sp
Answering 'y' or <space> at the prompt
will cause the corrected line to be executed, 'e' will leave the uncorrected 
command in the input buffer and
anything else will execute the original line unchanged.
.PP
Automatic correction is not guaranteed to work the way the user intended.
Command line parsing is done in a rudimentary fashion. It is mostly provided
as an experimental feature. Suggestions and improvements are welcome.
.PP
.SH "7. DOCUMENTATION LOOKUP"
The editor function
.I "run-help"
(M-h) prints a help file on the current command (using the same
definition of current as the completion routines use).  This help file
is found by searching the path list HPATH for files of the form
foo.help, foo.1, foo.8, or foo.6 in that order (assuming that the
current command is foo).  The file is just printed, not paged in any
way.  This is because
.I run-help
is meant to be used to look up short help files,
not manual pages (although it can do manual pages also).
.PP
.SH "8. ENHANCED HISTORY MECHANISM"
.I Tcsh
will save the history list between login sessions.  It does this by
writing the current list to the file "~/.history" on logout, and
reading it in on login.  For example, placing the line
.sp
.RS +.6i
> set history=25 savehist=20
.RE
.sp
tells 
.I tcsh 
to save the last 25 commands on the history list, and to
save the last 20 of them between logins.  The "savehist" variable may
be set up to the size of history, although it is an error to have
.I savehist
larger than
.I history.
In addition to the above 
.I tcsh, 
keeps unparsed (literal) versions of the 
history if the variable
.I histlit
is set. Also the toggle-history function toggles between
the parsed and literal version of the recalled history in the editor
buffer. For example:
.sp
.RS +.6i
.nf
> set histlit
> echo !:s/foo/bar; ls
Modifier failed.
> ^P
> echo !:s/foo/bar; ls
> unset histlit
> echo !:s/foo/bar; ls
Modifier failed.
> ^P
> echo unset histlit[M-r]
> echo !:s/foo/bar; ls
.fi
.RE
.sp
.I Tcsh
also supports the history escape 
.I !#.
This undocumented 
.I csh 
escape holds the words of the current line. This is useful in renaming
commands:
.sp
.RS +.6i
.nf
> mv foo bar!#:1
mv foo barfoo
.fi
.RE
.sp
Care should be taken when using this history expansion in 
.I csh
since there is no check for recursion. In 
.I tcsh
up to 10 levels of recursion are allowed.
.PP
Another difference between 
.I tcsh
and
.I csh
history expansion, is the treatment of history arguments. In
.I csh
.I "!3d" 
expands to event 3 with the letter "d" appended to it. 
There is no way to repeat a command that begins with a number using
the name of the command in the history escape. In 
.I tcsh 
only numeric arguments are treated as
event numbers; therefore
.I "!3d" 
is interpreted as: repeat the last command that
started with the string "3d". To mimic the 
.I csh
behavior
.I "!3\ed" 
can be used. 

.PP
.SH "9. AUTOMATIC LOGOUT/LOCKING"
The automatic locking and logout time are controlled by the variable
.I autologout.
The value of the first word is the number of minutes of inactivity will be
allowed before automatically logging the user out.  When that many
minutes have been reached, the shell prints "auto-logout" and dies
(without executing ~/.logout).  The default for 
.I tcsh 
is to set
.I autologout
for 60 minutes on login shells, and when the user is root.  To disable
autologout (for instance in a window system), unset the shell variable
.I autologout.
.PP
The value of the optional second word indicates the number of
minutes of inactivity after which the user will be prompted for his login 
password to continue working. Failure to enter the correct password 5 times, 
results in auto-logout.
.PP
.SH "10. EXECUTION OF A COMMAND PRIOR TO EACH PROMPT"
.I Tcsh
supports a special alias,
.I precmd,
which if set holds a command that will be executed before printing
each prompt.  For example, if the user has done
.sp
.RS +.6i
> alias precmd date
.RE
.sp
then the program
.I date
will be run just before the shell prompts for each command.  There are
no limitations on what precmd can be set to do, although discretion
should be used.
.PP
.SH "11. PERIODIC COMMAND EXECUTION"
.I Tcsh
is now capable of providing periodic command execution
through the use of the shell variable
.I tperiod
and the alias
.I periodic.
When these items are set, the alias
.I periodic
will be executed every
.I tperiod
minutes.
This provides a convenient means for checking on common but
infrequent changes, such as new messages.
Example:
.nf
.sp
.RS +.6i
> set tperiod = 30
> alias periodic checknews
.RE
.sp
.fi
This will cause the \fIchecknews\fR(1) program to be run every 30 minutes.
Having the alias
.I periodic
set but with an unset
.I tperiod
(or a value of 0 for
.I tperiod)
will cause
.I periodic
to degenerate to another form of
.I precmd.
.PP
.SH "12. NEW PROMPT FORMAT"
The format for the
.I prompt
shell variable has been changed to include many new things, such as
the current time of day, current working directory, etc..  The new
format uses "%<char>" to signal an expansion, much like
.I printf(3S).
The available sequences are:
.sp
.RS +.6i
.ta 1.2i 1.7i
.nf
%/	Current working directory.
%~	cwd.  If it starts with $HOME, that part is 
	replaced by a ~. In addition if a directory
	name prefix matches a user's home directory,
	that part of the directory will be substituted
	with ~user. NOTE: The ~user substitution will
	only happen if the shell has performed a ~
	expansion for that user name in this session.
%c or %.	Trailing component of cwd, may be 
	followed by by a digit to get more than one 
	component, if it starts with $HOME, that 
	part is replaced with a ~.
%C	Trailing component of cwd, may be followed 
	by a digit to get more than one component, no 
	~ substitution.
%h, %!, !	Current history event number.
%M	The full machine hostname.
%m	The hostname up to the first ".".
%S (%s)	Start (stop) standout mode.
%B (%b)	Start (stop) boldfacing mode. (Only if  
	tcsh was compiled to be eight bit clean.)
%U (%u)	Start (stop) underline mode. (Only if 
	tcsh was compiled to be eight bit clean.)
%t or %@	Current time of day, in 12-hour, am/pm format.
%T	Current time of day, in 24-hour format. 
	(But see the \fIampm\fP shell variable below.)
\ec	`c' is parsed the same way as in bindkey.
^c	`c' is parsed the same way as in bindkey.
%%	A single %.
%n	The user name, contents of $user.
%d	The weekday in <Day> format.
%D	The day in dd format.
%w	The month in <Mon> format.
%W	The month in mm format.
%y	The year in yy format.
%Y	The year in yyyy format.
%l	The line (tty) the user is logged on.
%L	clear from prompt to end of display or end of line.
%#	A `#' if tcsh is run as a root shell, 
	a `>' if not.
%{..%}	Include string as a literal escape sequence.
	Note that the enclosed escape sequence, should
	only be used to change terminal attributes and
	should not move the cursor location. Also, this
	cannot be the last character in the prompt 
	string. (Available only if tcsh was compiled to 
	be eight bit clean.)
%?	return code of the last command executed just
	before the prompt.
%R	In prompt3 this is the corrected string; in
	prompt2 it is the status of the parser.
.RE
.DT
.fi
.sp
The sequences for standout are often used to indicate that this is an
enabled (running as root) shell.
An example:
.sp
.RS +.6i
.ta 2i 3i
.nf
.ie t \{\
> set prompt="%m [%h] %B[%@]%b [%/] you rang? "
tut [37] \fB[2:54pm]\fR [/usr/accts/sys] you rang? _
.\}
.el \{\
> set prompt="%m [%h] %U[%@]%u [%/] you rang? "
tut [37] \fI[2:54pm]\fR [/usr/accts/sys] you rang? _
.\}
.RE
.DT
.fi
.sp
In addition, there is a new variable,
.I prompt2,
which is used to prompt for the body of while and for loops (wherever
normal
.I csh
prompts with a question mark).  The default for
.I prompt2
is "%R? ": the status of the parser followed by a question mark.
This alternate prompt is also used when the parser is waiting for more input; 
i.e. when the previous line ended in a \\.
The
.I prompt3
variable is used when displaying the corrected command line when
automatic spelling correction is in effect; it defaults to 
"CORRECT>%R (y|n|e)? ".

.PP
.SH "13. TIME-STAMPED HISTORY LIST"
The history list in 
.I tcsh 
now has a time-of-day stamp attached to
each history list event.
This time stamp is printed whenever the history command is executed.
This allows the user to keep track of when the various events occurred.
The time stamps are not maintained on the saved history list (also
available in \fIcsh\fR); thus, on logging back in, all the saved history
events will be recorded with the login time as their time stamp.
The time stamp printouts can be omitted from the history list by adding the
-t switch to the \fIhistory\fR command.
.PP
.SH "14. DIRECTORY ACCESS"
.I Tcsh 
supports three new flags to control directory style printing for
cd, pushd, popd, and dirs:
.TP 4
.I "-n "
Print entries in new lines so that the screen width is not exceeded
.TP 4
.I "-l"
Don't print \~ but print the whole path
.TP 4
.I "-v"
Print the stack entries one in each line, preceded by the stack number.
.PP 
Note that popd +n can be used to pop out stack entries of directories that
do not exist any more.
.PP
.I Tcsh
will now allow the user to access all elements in the directory stack directly.
The syntax "=<digit>" is recognized by 
.I tcsh
as indicating a particular directory
in the stack.
(This works for the file/command name recognition as well.)
This syntax is analogous to the ~ syntax for access to users' home
directories.
The stack is viewed as zero-based, i.e., =0 is the same as $cwd, which is
the same as ".".
As a special case, the string "=-" is recognized as indicating the last
directory in the stack.
Thus,
.nf
.sp
.RS +.6i
> dirs -v
0 /usr/net/bin 
1 /usr/spool/uucp 
2 /usr/accts/sys
> echo =2
/usr/accts/sys
> ls -l =1/LOGFILE
-rw-r--r-- 1 uucp	2594 Jan 19 09:09 /usr/spool/uucp/LOGFILE
> echo =-/.cs*
/usr/accts/sys/.cshrc
> echo =4
Not that many dir stack entries.
>
.RE
.sp
.fi
.I Tcsh 
will complain if you ask for a directory stack item
which does not exist.
.PP
In the normal 
.I csh,
saying "pushd +2" would rotate the entire stack
around through 2 stack elements, placing the entry found there
at the top of the stack.
If, however, the new shell variable
.I dextract
is set, then issuing "pushd +n" will cause the nth directory stack
element to be extracted from its current position, which will then be
pushed onto the top of the stack.  Example:
.sp
.nf
.RS +.6i
> dirs
~ /usr/spool/uucp /usr/net/bin /sys/src
> set dextract
> pushd +2
/usr/net/bin ~ /usr/spool/uucp /sys/src
> unset dextract
> pushd +2
/usr/spool/uucp /sys/src /usr/net/bin ~
.RE
.fi
.PP
The way symbolic links that point to directories are crossed is
determined by two variables: 
.I chase_symlinks 
and 
.I ignore_symlinks. 
If 
.I chase_symlinks 
is set, then every time the directory changes, 
.I $cwd
reflects the real directory name, and not the name through the link. 
A notable exception is the user's home directory, but that should
be fixed. If 
.I ignore_symlinks 
is set, then directory change tries to find where
you came from before you crossed the link to change the directory 
relatively. If you chdir through a symbolic link
and then cd .., 
you will end .. relatively to where you were before
you crossed the link and not .. relatively to 
where the symbolic link points.
.PP
For example:
.sp
.nf
.RS +.6i
> cd /tmp
> mkdir from from/src to
> ln -s ../from/src to/dst
> echo $cwd 
/tmp

> unset ignore_symlinks; unset chase_symlinks
> cd to/dst; echo $cwd 
/tmp/to/dst
> cd ..
/tmp/from

> unset ignore_symlinks; set chase_symlinks
> cd /tmp/to/dst; echo $cwd
/tmp/from/src
> cd ..; echo $cwd
/tmp/from

> set ignore_symlinks; unset chase_symlinks
> cd /tmp/to/dst; echo $cwd
/tmp/to/dst
> cd ..; echo $pwd
/tmp/to
.RE
.sp
.fi
In case you are wondering what happens when you set both, 
.I ignore_symlinks 
will override
.I chase_symlinks.
.PP
.SH "15. WATCHING FOR LOGINS AND LOGOUTS"
.I Tcsh
has a mechanism so that the user can watch for login and logout
activity of any user or terminal in the system.
This is accomplished using the new special shell variable
.I watch,
which contains login/terminal pattern pairs to be checked for activity.
For example:
.nf
.sp
.RS +.6i
> set watch=(sys ttyjd root console)
.RE
.sp
.fi
This setting will allow the user to check on when the user "sys" logs in on
/dev/ttyjd.  Similarly, it will inform the user of root's activity on the
console.  In order to be more general, the word "any" may be substituted for
either a user's or a terminal's name, thus allowing
.nf
.sp
.RS +.6i
> set watch=('b*' any any ttyh0)
.RE
.sp
.fi
which will check for users that match the pattern 'b*' logging in 
or out of the system on any terminal, as well as anyone logging in 
to /dev/ttyh0. Naturally, the completely general case
.nf
.sp
.RS +.6i
> set watch=(any any)
.RE
.sp
.fi
allows the user to check on any and all login/logout activity in the
the system.
.PP
By default, the interval between checks of users on the system is
10 minutes;
this can be changed by making the first element of
.I watch
a number of minutes which should be used instead, as in
.nf
.sp
.RS +.6i
> set watch=(40 any any)
.RE
.sp
.fi
which will check for any users logging in or out every 40 minutes.
.PP
There is also a new command,
.I log,
which is used to cause 
.I tcsh 
to inform the user of all users/terminals
affected by
.I watch
whether they have been announced before or not.
This is useful if a user has been on for some time and cannot remember
if a particular person/terminal is online right now or not.
.I Log
will reset all indication of previous announcement and give the user
the login list all over again, as well as printing the current value
of
.I watch.
.PP
The first time that
.I watch
is set at 
.I tcsh
startup, all affected users and terminals will be
printed as though those users/terminals had just logged on.
This may appear to be a bug, but is generally considered a feature,
since it allows the user to see who is on when he first logs in.
.PP
The format of the printouts can be tailored via setting of the variable
.I who.
The following sequences are available for the format specification:
.sp
.RS +.6i
.ta 1.2i 1.7i
.nf
%n	The name of the user that logged in/out.
%a	The observed action, i.e. "logged on", 
	"logged off", or "replaced <olduser> on".
%l	The line (tty) the user is logged on.
%S (%s)	Start (stop) standout mode.
%B (%b)	Start (stop) boldfacing mode. (Only if 
	tcsh was compiled to be eight bit clean)
%U (%u)	Start (stop) underline mode. (Only if 
	tcsh was compiled to be eight bit clean)
%M	The full hostname of the remote host ("local" 
	if non-remote).
%m	The hostname up to the first ".". If only 
	the ip address is available or the utmp 
	field contains the name of an x-windows 
	display, the whole name is printed.
%t or %@	The time, in 12-hour, am/pm format (logout 
	time is approximated if unavailable).
%T	The time, in 24-hour format. (but see 
	the "ampm" shell variable below).
%D	The day in dd format.
%w	The month in <Mon> format.
%W	The month in mm format.
%Y	The year in yy format.
.RE
.DT
.fi
.sp
The %M and %m sequences are only available on systems that store the
remote hostname in /etc/utmp. If
.I who
is not set, the format defaults to "%n has %a %l from %m.", or
"%n has %a %l." on systems that don't store the hostname.
.PP
.SH "16. TIMED EVENT LIST"
.I Tcsh
now supports a scheduled-event list through the use of the command
.I sched.
This command gives the user a mechanism by which to arrange for other
commands to be executed at given times.
An event is added to the scheduled-event list by saying
.nf
.sp
.RS +.6i
> sched [+]hh:mm <command>
.RE
.sp
.fi
as in
.nf
.sp
.RS +.6i
> sched 11:00 echo It\\'s eleven o\\'clock.
.RE
.sp
.fi
This will make an entry in the list at 11am for the echo command
to be run with the given arguments.
The time may be specified in either absolute or relative time,
and absolute times may have a morning/afternoon specification as
well, using "am" or "pm."
For example,
.nf
.sp
.RS +.6i
> sched +2:15 /usr/lib/uucp/uucico -r1 -sother
> sched 5pm set prompt='[%h] It\\'s after 5; go home: >'
> sched +3am echo This syntax doesn\\'t work.
Relative time inconsistent with am/pm.
>
.RE
.sp
.fi
Note that 
.I tcsh 
will complain if you try to make faulty
time specifications.
.PP
Printing the current time-event list is accomplished by giving the
.I sched
command with no arguments:
.nf
.sp
.RS +.6i
> sched
     1  Wed Apr  4 15:42  /usr/lib/uucp/uucico -r1 -sother
     2  Wed Apr  4 17:00  set prompt=[%h] It's after 5; go home: >
>
.RE
.sp
.fi
There is also a mechanism by which the user can remove an item
from the list:
.nf
.sp
.RS +.6i
> sched --3
Usage for delete: sched -<item#>.
> sched -3
Not that many scheduled events.
> sched -2
> sched
     1  Wed Apr  4 15:42  /usr/lib/uucp/uucico -r1 -sother
>
.RE
.sp
.fi
All commands specified on the scheduled-event list will be executed just
prior to printing the first prompt immediately following the time
when the command is to be run.
Hence, it is possible to miss the exact time when the command is
to be run, but 
.I tcsh 
will definitely get around to all commands
which are overdue at its next prompt.
Scheduled-event list items which come due while 
.I tcsh 
is waiting for
user input will be executed immediately.
In no case, however, will normal operation of already-running
commands be interrupted so that a scheduled-event list element
may be run.
.PP
This mechanism is similar to, but not the same as, the
.IR at (1)
command on some Unix systems.
Its major disadvantage is that it does not necessarily run a
command at exactly the specified time (but only if another
command is already being run).
Its major advantage is that commands which run directly from 
.I tcsh,
as sched commands are, have access to shell variables and other
structures.
This provides a mechanism for changing one's working environment
based on the time of day.
.PP
.SH "17. BUILTIN FOR ls -F"
There is a new builtin command called
.I ls-F
which does the same thing as the command "ls -aF" if the shell
variable
.I showdots
has been set, and acts like "ls -F" otherwise. Ls-F works like
ls, only it is generally faster. If other switches are passed
to 
.I ls-F, 
then the normal ls is executed. Aliasing ls to ls-F provides
a fast alternative way of listing files.
Note that on non BSD machines, where ls -C is not the default,
.I ls-F,
behaves like ls -CF.
.sp
.I ls-F
appends the following characters depending on the file type:
.sp
.RS +.6i
.ta 1.2i 1.7i
.nf
=	File is an AF_UNIX domain socket.
	[if system supports sockets]
|	File is a named pipe (fifo)
	[if system supports named pipes]
%	File is a character device
#	File is a block device
/	File is a directory
*	File is executable
+	File is a hidden directory [aix]
	or context dependent [hpux]
:	File is network special [hpux]
.RE
.DT
.fi
.sp
On systems that support symbolic links the variable
.I listlinks 
controls the way symbolic links are identified. If 
.I listlinks 
is not set then the character '@' is appended to
the file. If 
.I listlinks 
is set then the following characters are appended to the
filename depending on the type of file the symbolic links
points to:
.sp
.RS +.6i
.ta 1.2i 1.7i
.nf
@	File is a symbolic link pointing
	to a non-directory
>	File is a symbolic link pointing
	to a directory 
&	File is a symbolic link pointing
	to nowhere
.RE
.DT
.fi
.sp
While setting 
.I listlinks
can be helpful while navigating around the file system, it slows down
.I ls-F 
and it causes mounting of file systems if the symbolic links point
to an NFS auto-mounted partition.
.PP
.SH "18. GLOBBING SYNTAX ADDITIONS"
The syntax for any character in a range (for example ".[a-z]*") has
been extended so as to conform with standard Unix regular expression
syntax (see
.IR ed (1)).
Specifically, after an open bracket ("["), if the first character is a
caret ("^") then the character matched will be any not in the range
specified.  For example:
.sp
.nf
.RS +.6i
> cd ~
> echo .[a-z]*
\&.cshrc .emacs .login .logout .menuwmrc
> echo .[^.]*
\&.Xdefaults .Xinit .cshrc .emacs .login .logout .menuwmrc
>
.RE
.fi
.sp
Note that the second form includes .Xdefaults and .Xinit because 'X'
(and all the lower case letters) are outside of the range of a single '.'.
.PP
Also the ability to negate a globbing pattern has been added:
.sp
.nf
.RS +.6i
> echo *
foo foobar bar barfoo
> echo ^foo*
bar barfoo
.RE
.fi
.sp
Note that this does not work correctly if the expression does not have
any wildcard characters (?*[]) or if the expression has braces {}.
.PP
.SH "19. NEW ENVIRONMENT AND SHELL VARIABLES"
On startup,
.I tcsh
now automatically initializes the environment variable
.I HOST
to the name of the machine that it is running on.  It does this by
doing a
.IR gethostname (2)
system call, and setting
.I HOST
to the result.
.PP
.I Tcsh
also initializes the environment variable
.I HOSTTYPE
to a symbolic name for the type of computer that it is running on.
This is useful when sharing a single
physical directory between several types of machines (running NFS, for
instance).  For example, if the following is in
.I .login:
.sp
.RS +.3i
set path = (~/bin.$HOSTTYPE /usr/ucb /bin /usr/bin /usr/games .)
.RE
.sp
and the user has directories named "bin.\fImachine\fR" (where
.I machine
is a name from the list below), then the user can have the same
programs compiled for different machines in the appropriate
"bin.\fImachine\fR" directories and
.I tcsh
will run the binary for the correct machine.
.sp
The current possible values are:
.sp
.ta 1.5i
.nf
\fIaix370\fR		an IBM 370, running aix
\fIaixESA\fR		an IBM ESA, running aix
\fIalliant\fR		an Alliant FX series
\fIamdahl\fR		an Amdahl running uts 2.1
\fIapollo\fR		an Apollo running DomainOS
\fIatt3b15\fR		an AT&T 3b15
\fIatt3b2\fR		an AT&T 3b2
\fIatt3b20\fR		an AT&T 3b20
\fIatt3b5\fR		an AT&T 3b5
\fIbalance\fR		a Sequent Balance (32000 based)
\fIbutterfly\fR		a BBN Computer Butterfly 1000
\fIconvex\fR		a Convex
\fIcray\fR		a Cray running Unicos
\fIdecstation\fR	a DecStation XXXX
\fIeta10\fR		an ETA 10 running SVR3
\fIgould-np1\fR		a Gould NP1
\fIhk68\fR		a Heurikon HK68 running Uniplus+ 5.0
\fIhp300\fR		an HP 9000, series 300, running mtXinu
\fIhp800\fR		an HP 9000, series 800, running mtXinu
\fIhp9000s300\fR	an HP 9000, series 300, running hpux
\fIhp9000s500\fR	an HP 9000, series 500, running hpux
\fIhp9000s700\fR	an HP 9000, series 700, running hpux
\fIhp9000s800\fR	an HP 9000, series 800, running hpux
\fIhp\fR			an HP, running hpux
\fIi386\fR		an Intel 386, generic
\fIi386-mach\fR		an Intel 386, running mach
\fIintel386\fR		an Intel 386, running INTEL's SVR3
\fIiris3d\fR		a Silicon Graphics Iris 3000
\fIiris4d\fR		a Silicon Graphics Iris 4D
\fIisc386\fR		an Intel 386, running ISC
\fIm88k\fR			an mc88000 CPU machine
\fImac2\fR			an Apple Computer Macintosh II, running AUX
\fImasscomp\fR			a Concurrent (Masscomp), running RTU
\fIminix386\fR			an i386 running minix
\fIminix\fR			a mac or an amiga running minix
\fImips\fR			another mips CPU
\fImultimax\fR		an Encore Computer Corp. Multimax (32000 based)
\fInews\fR			a Sony NEWS 800 or 1700 workstation
\fInews_mips\fR		a NeWS machine with mips CPU
\fInd500\fR		a Norsk Data ND 500/5000 running Ndix
\fIns32000\fR		an NS32000 CPU machine
\fInext\fR			a NeXT computer
\fIpfa50\fR			a PFU/Fujitsu A-xx computer
\fIps2\fR			an IBM PS/2, running aix
\fIptx\fR			a Sequent Symmetry running DYNIX/ptx (386/486 based)
\fIpyramid\fR		a Pyramid Technology computer (of any flavor)
\fIrs6000\fR		an IBM RS6000, running aix 
\fIrt\fR			an IBM PC/RT, running BSD (AOS 4.3) or mach
\fIrtpc\fR			an IBM PC/RT, running aix
\fIsco386\fR		an Intel 386, running SCO
\fIstellar\fR		a stellar running stellix
\fIsun\fR			a Sun workstation of none of the above types
\fIsun2\fR			a Sun Microsystems series 2 workstation (68010 based)
\fIsun3\fR			a Sun Microsystems series 3 workstation (68020 based)
\fIsun386i\fR		a Sun Microsystems 386i workstation (386 based)
\fIsun4\fR			a Sun Microsystems series 4 workstation (SPARC based)
\fIsymmetry\fR		a Sequent Symmetry running DYNIX 3 (386/486 based)
\fItitan\fR		an Stardent Titan
\fIunixpc\fR		an UNIX/PC running SVR1 att7300 aka att3b1
\fIvax\fR			a Digital Equipment Corp. Vax (of any flavor)
.DT
.fi
.sp
(The names of the machines are usually trade marks of the
corresponding companies.)
.PP
.I Tcsh
also initializes the shell variables
.I uid
and
.I gid
to the value of the current real user ID/GID.  This is useful for telling
what user/group the shell is running as. Under Domain/OS 
.I tcsh
will also set 
.I oid
indicating the current real organization id.
.PP
.SH "20. COMMANDS FOR DEBUGGING"
Only two such commands are available at this point, both concerned with
testing termcap entries.
.br
.I telltc
tells you, politely, what 
.I tcsh 
thinks of your terminal, and
.I settc
`cap' `value'
tells
.I tcsh
to believe that the termcap capability `cap' ( as defined in
.IR termcap (5)
) has the value `value'. No checking for sanity is performed, so beware of
improper use.
.PP
.SH "21. SEARCHING FOR THE VISUAL HISTORY"
Four new editor functions have been added in emacs mode: Two of them,
history-search-backward, bound to M-p (and M-P),
and history-search-forward, bound to M-n (and M-N),
implement a conventional search mechanism,
while the other two, i-search-back and i-search-fwd,
both unbound by default, implement the emacs-style
incremental search.
.PP
History-search-backward (history-search-forward)
searches backward (forward) through the history
list for previous (next) occurrence of the beginning of the input
buffer as a command.  That is, if the user types:
.sp
.nf
.RS +.6i
> echo foo
foo
> ls
filea	fileb
> echo bar
bar
> 
.RE
.fi
.sp
and then types "echo<ESC>p", the shell will place "echo bar" in the
editing buffer.  If another \fIM-p\fR was entered, the editing buffer
would change to "echo foo".  This capability is compatible with the
plain visual history; if the user were to then enter \fI^P\fR the
editing buffer would be changed to "ls". The pattern used to search
through the history is defined by the characters from the beginning of
the line up to the current cursor position and may contain a shell globbing
pattern. Successive history searches use the same pattern.
.PP
When the incremental search functions are used, a prompt -
"bck:" or "fwd:", depending on the chosen direction - appears, and
characters typed are appended to the search pattern.
The matching command line is placed in the editing buffer,
with the cursor positioned at the point where the pattern was found
(the incremental search will also do searching within a command line).
If the search fails, the terminal bell is rung,
and the ':' in the prompt is changed to '?'.
.PP
If these functions are bound to single characters, and one of those
is typed again during the incremental search, the search continues
in the corresponding direction, with the pattern unchanged; if the previous
search failed, this will also cause it to "wrap around" the history list.
Finally, the following characters also have a special meaning
during the search:
.RS +.6i
.nf
.ta 1.2i
.sp
Delete	(or any character bound to \fIbackward-delete-char\fR)
	Undo the effect of the last character typed,
	deleting a character from the pattern if appropriate.
^G	Abort the search, back to the last successful one
	if previous search failed, otherwise entire search.
^W	Append the rest of the current word to the pattern.
ESC	Terminate the search, leaving current line in buffer.
.RE
.DT
.fi
.sp
Any other character, that isn't bound to
.I self-insert-command,
terminates the search, leaving the current command line in the editing
buffer, after which
.I tcsh
interprets the character as if it was normal input -
notably
.I Return
will cause the current command line to be executed.
.PP
In vi mode "vi-search-fwd" (bound to '/') and "vi-search-back" (bound to '?') 
can be used to search the visual history. In command mode '/' or '?' followed 
by a shell pattern, searches the visual history for the pattern. The pattern
can be terminated either with a
.I Return, 
in which case the matched history event is placed in the command buffer or
an 
.I Escape,
in which case the matched history event is executed. If no history event 
matches the shell pattern then the bell is rung.
.PP
.SH "22. BUILTIN WHICH(1)/WHERE COMMANDS"
There is now a builtin version of the
.IR which (1)
command.  The builtin version is just like the original, except that
it correctly reports aliases peculiar to this
.I tcsh,
and builtin commands.  The only other difference is that the builtin
runs somewhere between 10 and 100 times faster.
There is also a key-function interface to this command: the
.I which-command
function (normally bound to M-?), can be used anywhere on the command line,
and will in effect do a 'which' on the command name.
.PP
Similarly where will report all known instances of the command: aliases,
builtins, as well as all references in the path.
.PP
.SH "23. RESTARTING A STOPPED EDITOR"
There is another new editor function: run-fg-editor, which is bound to
\fIM-^Z\fR.  When typed, it saves away the current input buffer, and
looks for a stopped job with a name equal to the file name part (last
element) of either the EDITOR or VISUAL environment variables (if not
defined, the default names are "ed" and "vi" respectively).  If such a
job is found, then it is restarted as if "fg %\fIname\fR" had been
typed.  This is used to toggle back and forth between an editor and
the shell easily.  Some people bind this function to \fI^Z\fR so they
can do this even more easily.
.PP
.SH "24. STATUS LINE SUPPORT
.I Tcsh
has a new builtin called 
.I echotc
that allows the user to access the terminal capabilities from the command
line, similar to the system V 
.IR tput (1).
.sp
.RS +.6i
> echotc home
.RE
.sp
Places the cursor at the home position and
.sp
.RS +.6i
> echotc cm 3 10
.RE
.sp
places the cursor at column 3 row 10.
This command replaces the 
.I el
and
.I sl
variables that used contain the escape sequences to begin and end 
status line changes. The command:
.sp
.RS +.6i
> echo $sl this is a test $el
.RE
.sp
is replaced by:
.sp
.RS +.6i
> echotc ts 0; echo "this is a test"; echotc fs
.RE
.sp
In addition 
.I echotc 
understands the arguments
.I baud,
.I lines,
.I cols,
.I meta,
and
.I tabs
And prints the baud rate, the number of lines and columns, and "yes" or
"no" depending if the terminal has tabs or a meta key.
This can be useful in determining how terse the output of commands
will be depending on the baud rate, or
setting limits to commands like history to the highest number
so that the terminal does not scroll:
.sp
.RS +.6i
> set history=`echotc lines`
.RE
.RS +.6i
> @ history--
.RE
.sp
Note: Termcap strings may contain wildcard characters, and echoing them
will not work correctly. The suggested method of setting shell variables
to terminal capability strings is using double quotes, as in the following
example that places the date in the status line:
.sp
.RS +.6i
> set tosl="`echotc ts 0`"
.RE
.RS +.6i
> set frsl="`echotc fs`"
.RE
.RS +.6i
> echo -n "$tosl";date; echo -n "$frsl"
.RE
.sp
.I Echotc
accepts two flags. The flag
.I \-v 
enables verbose messages and the flag
.I \-s 
ignores any errors and returns the empty string if the capability is not
found.

.PP
.SH "25. EXECUTION OF A COMMAND AFTER CHANGING THE CURRENT WORKING DIRECTORY"
.I Tcsh
now supports a special alias,
.I cwdcmd,
which if set holds a command that will be executed after changing the
value of $cwd.  For example, if the user is running on an X window
system 
.I xterm(1),
and a re-parenting window manager that supports title bars such
as 
.I twm(1) and has done:
.sp
.RS +.6i
> alias cwdcmd  'echo -n "^[]2;${HOST}:$cwd ^G"'
.RE
.sp
then the shell
will change the title of the running 
.I xterm(1)
to be the name of the host,
a colon, and the full current working directory.  
A more fancy way to do that is:
.sp
.RS +.6i
> alias cwdcmd 'echo -n "^[]2;${HOST}:$cwd^G^[]1;${HOST}^G"'
.RE
.sp
This will put the hostname and working directory on the title bar but
only the hostname in the icon manager menu.
.pp
Note that if a user defines
.I cwdcmd
to contain a
.I cd,
.I pushd,
or
.I popd,
command, an infinite loop may result.  In this case, it is the
author's opinion that said user will get what he deserves.
.PP
.SH "26. NATIVE LANGUAGE SYSTEM"
.I Tcsh
is eight bit clean (if so compiled, see the description of the
.I version
shell variable below), and will thus support character sets needing this
capability.
The
.I tcsh
support for NLS differs depending on whether
it was compiled to use the system's NLS (again, see the
.I version
variable) or not.
In either case, the default for character classification
(i.e. which characters are printable etc) and sorting
is 7-bit ascii, and any setting or unsetting of the LANG or LC_CTYPE
environment variables will cause a check for possible changes in these
respects.
.PP
When using the system's NLS, the
.I setlocale
C library function will be called
to determine appropriate character classification and
sorting - this function will typically examine the LANG and LC_CTYPE
variables for this purpose (refer to the system documentation
for further details).
Otherwise, NLS will be simulated, by assuming that the
ISO 8859-1 character set is used
whenever either of the LANG and LC_CTYPE variables are set, regardless of
their values. Sorting is not affected for the simulated NLS.
.PP
In addition, with both real and simulated NLS, all printable
characters in the range \e200-\e377, i.e. those that have
M-<char> bindings, are automatically rebound to
.I self-insert-command
(the corresponding binding for the escape+<char> sequence, if any, is
left alone).
This automatic rebinding is inhibited if the NOREBIND environment variable
is set - this may be useful for the simulated NLS, or a primitive real NLS
which assumes full ISO 8859-1 (otherwise all M-<char> bindings in the
range \e240-\e377 will effectively be undone in these cases).
Explicitly rebinding the relevant keys, using
.I bindkey,
is of course still possible.
.PP
Unknown characters (i.e. those that are neither printable nor control
characters) will be printed using the \ennn format.
If the tty is not in 8 bit mode, other 8 bit characters will be printed by
converting them to ascii and using standout mode.
.I Tcsh
will never change the 7/8 bit mode of the tty, and will track user-initiated
settings for this - i.e. it may be necessary for NLS users
(or, for that matter, those that want to use a Meta key) to explicitly set
the tty in 8 bit mode through the appropriate
.IR stty (1)
command in e.g. the .login file.
.PP
.SH "27. AUTOMATIC PROCESS TIME REPORTING"
Automatic process time reporting is a feature that exists in 
.I csh, 
but it is usually not documented. In addition
.I tcsh 
provides a slightly enriched syntax. Process time reports are controlled
via the 
.I time 
shell variable.
The first word of the 
.I time 
variable indicates the minimum number of CPU seconds the process has to
consume before a time report is produced. The optional second word controls
the format of the report.
The following sequences are available for the format specification:
.sp
.RS +.6i
.ta 1.2i 1.7i
.nf
%U	The time the process spent in user mode 
	in cpu seconds.
%S	The time the process spent in kernel mode 
	in cpu seconds.
%E	The elapsed time in seconds.
%P	The CPU percentage computed as (%U + %S) / %E.
.RE
.DT
.fi
.sp
The following sequences are supported only in systems that have the
BSD resource limit functions.
.sp
.RS +.6i
.ta 1.2i 1.7i
.nf
%W	Number of times the process was swapped.
%X	The average amount in (shared) text space used 
	in Kbytes.
%D	The average amount in (unshared) data/stack 
	space used in Kbytes.
%K	The total space used (%X + %D) in Kbytes.
%M	The maximum memory the process had in use at 
	any time in Kbytes.
%F	The number of major page faults (page needed to 
	be brought from disk).
%R	The number of minor page faults.
%I	The number of input operations.
%O	The number of output operations.
%r	The number of socket messages received.
%s	The number of socket messages sent.
%k	The number of signals received.
%w	Number of voluntary context switches (waits).
%c	Number of involuntary context switches.
.RE
.DT
.fi
.sp
The default time format is "%Uu %Ss %E %P %X+%Dk %I+%Oio %Fpf+%Ww" for
systems that support resource usage reporting and "%Uu %Ss %E %P" for
systems that do not.
.PP
For Sequent's DYNIX/ptx %X, %D, %K, %r and %s are not supported.
However, the following additional sequences are available.
.sp
.RS +.6i
.ta 1.2i 1.7i
.nf
%Y	The number of system calls performed.
%Z	The number of pages which are zero-filled
	on demand.
%i	The number of times a process' resident
	set size was increased by the kernel.
%d	The number of times a process' resident
	set size was decreased by the kernel.
%l	The number of read system calls performed.
%m	The number of write system calls performed.
%p	the number of reads from raw disk devices.
%q	the number of writes to raw disk devices.
.RE
.DT
.fi
.sp
The default time format for Sequent's DYNIX/ptx is
"%Uu %Ss $E %P %I+%Oio %Fpf+%Ww". Also note that the
CPU percentage can be higher than 100% on multi-processors.
.PP
.SH "28. OS/DEPENDENT BUILTIN SUPPORT"
.sp
.br
.I "TRANSPARENT COMPUTING FACILITY"
.PP
On systems that support TCF (aix-ibm370, aix-ps2) the following builtins
have been added:
.TP 10
.B getspath
Print the current system execution path.
.TP 10
.B setspath LOCAL|<site>|<cpu> ...
Set the current execution path.
.sp
.TP 
.B getxvers
Print the current experimental version prefix.
.sp
.TP 
.B setxvers [<string>]
If the optional string is ommited, any experimental version prefix is removed.
Otherwise the experimental version prefix is set to string.
.sp
.TP 
.B migrate [-<site>] <pid>|%<jobid> ...
.PD 0
.TP
.B migrate -<site> 
.PD
The first form migrates the process or job to the site specified or the
default site determined by the system path.
The second form, is equivalent to 'migrate -<site> $$', i.e. migrates the
current process to the site specified. Note: migrating 
.I tcsh
itself can cause unexpected behavior, since the shell
does not like to lose its tty.
.sp
.PP
In addition, jobs will print the site the job is executing.
.PP
.sp
.br
.I "Domain/OS Support"
.PP
.TP 
.B inlib <shared-library> ...
Inlib adds shared libraries to the current environment. There is no way
to remove them...
.TP
.B rootnode //<nodename>
Change the name of the current rootnode. From now on, 
.I / 
will resolve to
.I //<rootnode>
.TP
.B ver [<systype>] [<command>]
Without arguments, print 
.I $SYSTYPE;
with the 
.I <systype> 
provided, set 
.I SYSTYPE
to the one provided. Valid systypes are bsd4.3 and sys5.3. If a
.I <command>
is
argument is given, then 
.I <command> 
is executed under the 
.I <systype> 
specified.
.PP
.sp
.br
.I "Mach"
.PP
.TP 
.B setpath <path-spec> ...
XXX: What does it do?
.PP
.sp
.br
.I "Masscomp/RTU"
.PP
.TP 
.B universe <universe-spec> ...
Sets the current universe to the specified parameter.
.PP
.sp
.br
.I "Convex/OS"
.PP
.TP 
.B warp [<universe-spec>] ...
Without arguments prints the current value of the universe. With a universe
argument it sets the current universe to the value of the argument.
.sp
.SH "29. WINDOW SIZE TRACKING"
On systems that support SIGWINCH or SIGWINDOW,
.I tcsh
adapts to window resizing automatically and adjusts the environment
variables LINES and COLUMNS if set. Also if the environment variable
TERMCAP contains li#, and co# fields, these will be adjusted also to
reflect the new window size.

.SH "30. INPUT FILES"
On startup 
.I tcsh
will try to source 
.I "/etc/csh.cshrc" 
and then
.I "/etc/csh.login"
if the shell is a login shell. Then it will try to source 
.I "$HOME/.tcshrc" 
and then 
.I "$HOME/.cshrc"
if 
.I "$HOME/.tcshrc" 
is not found. Then it will source
.I "$HOME/.login"
if the shell is a login shell.
On exit
.I tcsh
will source first
.I "/etc/csh.logout"
and then 
.I "$HOME/.logout"
if the shell was a login shell.
.sp
Note: On 
.I convexos
and
.I stellix
the names of the system default files are
.I "/etc/cshrc",
.I "/etc/login"
and
.I "/etc/logout"
respectively. On the NeXT the names are also different:
.I "/etc/cshrc.std",
.I "/etc/login.std"
and
.I "/etc/logout.std"
Finally on
.I irix,
.I A/UX
and the
.I cray
only the file
.I "/etc/cshrc"
is executed if the shell is a login shell. 

.SH "31. COMMAND LINE OPTIONS"
This section describes options that are either undocumented in 
.I csh
(*)
or present only in 
.I tcsh.
(+)
.sp
.TP 4
.I \-d
Load ~/.cshdirs (If 
.I tcsh 
was compiled with CSHDIRS enabled)(+)
.TP 4
.I \-Dname[=value]
Set environment variable name to value. (Domain/OS only) (+)
.TP 4
.I \-F
Use fork() instead of vfork() to spawn processes. (Convex/OS only) (+)
.TP 4
.I \-l
Make 
.I tcsh 
behave like a login shell.  (+)
.TP 4
.I \-m 
Allow reading of a .cshrc that does not belong to the effective
user. Newer versions of
.I su(1) 
can pass that to the shell. (some versions of csh have it) (+*)
.TP 4
.I \-q 
Make the shell accept SIGQUIT, and behave when it is used under a debugger.
Job control is disabled. (*)
.sp
.SH "32. HISTORY AND VARIABLE MODIFIER ENHANCEMENTS"
.I Tcsh
accepts more than one variable modifier per variable or history expansion. 
For example, in 
.I csh(1)
the following command expands to:
.sp
.nf
.RS +.6in
% set a=/usr/local/foo.bar.baz
% echo $a:t:r:e
foo.bar.baz:r:e
.RE
.fi
.sp
but in 
.I tcsh:
.sp
.nf
.RS +.6in
> set a=/usr/local/foo.bar.baz
> echo $a:t:r:e
bar
.RE
.fi
.sp
This bug fix changes slightly the input syntax of 
.I csh,
causing expressions of the form to have invalid syntax:
.sp
.nf
.RS +.6in
> set a=/usr/local/foo.bar.baz
> echo $a:t:$cwd
Unknown variable modifier.
.RE
.fi
.sp
Which is the correct behavior, since after the second colon a variable
modifier is expected and `$' is found.  Expressions like this should be 
re-written as:
.sp
.nf
.RS +.6in
> echo ${a:t}:$cwd
.RE
.fi
.sp
Also 
.I tcsh 
has an additional : character
.I a
which applies the current modifier multiple times in the same word, in
the same way
.I g
applies the modifier once in each word:
.sp
.nf
.RS +.6in
> set foo=(a:b:c d:e:f)
> echo $foo:s/:/ /
a b:c d:e:f
> echo $foo:gs/:/ /
a b:c d e:f
> echo $foo:as/:/ /
a b c d:e:f
> echo $foo:ags/:/ /
a b c d e f
.RE
.fi
.sp
The 
.I csh 
expert will notice in the above example another
.I tcsh 
enhancement. In 
.I csh
the 
.I s
modifier does not work for variables.
.sp
The 
.I a 
character works correctly with other modifiers, for example:
.sp
.nf
.RS +.6in
> echo $host
tesla.ee.cornell.edu
> echo $host:r
tesla.ee.cornell
> echo $host:ar
tesla
.RE
.fi
.sp
.I Note:
The 
.I a
character causes a modifier to be applied to a word repeatedly until
the modifier fails. This can lead to an infinite loop in the current
implementation when used with the
.I s
modifier. For example :as/f/ff/ will never terminate. This behavior
might change in the future.

.SH FYI
This shell uses cbreak mode but takes typed-ahead characters anyway.
You can still use
.IR stty (1)
to set some of the modes of your terminal (but not bindings).
.PP
This shell will restore your tty to a sane mode if it appears to
return from some command in raw, cbreak, or noecho mode. This behavior
can be changed using 
.I setty.
.PP
.SH ENVIRONMENT
HPATH -- path to look for command documentation
.br
LANG -- used to give preferred character environment (see NLS)
.br
LC_CTYPE -- used to change only ctype character handling (see NLS)
.br
NOREBIND -- inhibits rebinding of printable characters to self-insert-command
.br
PATH -- path to look for command execution
.br
SHLVL -- current shell level nesting
.br
TERM -- used to tell how to handle the terminal
.br
LINES -- Number of lines in terminal (see WINDOW SIZE)
.br
COLUMNS -- Number of columns in terminal (see WINDOW SIZE)
.br
TERMCAP -- Terminal capability string (see WINDOW SIZE)
.br
SYSTYPE -- The current system type (Domain OS only)
.PP
.SH "NEW SHELL VARIABLES"
.br
.TP 10
.B addsuffix 
add a / for directories, and a space for normal files when
complete matches a name exactly.
If unset don't add anything extra.
.TP 10
.B ampm
show all times in 12 hour, AM/PM format.
.TP 10
.B autocorrect
Correct mis-spelled path components automatically before attempting
completion.
.TP 10
.B autoexpand
invoke the expand-history function automatically on completion.
.TP 10
.B autolist 
list possibilities on an ambiguous completion.
.TP 10
.B autologout 
The first word indicates
number of minutes of inactivity before automatic logout.
The optional second word indicates the number of minutes of inactivity
after which the user will be prompted for his login password to enter a 
command.
.TP 10
.B backslash_quote
makes the backslash quote \\, \', and ". This option changes the
parsing mechanism for tcsh, and it can cause syntax errors in 
.I csh
scripts.
.TP 10
.B chase_symlinks 
always resolve symbolic links to real names on cd, etc.
.TP 10
.B correct 
automatically try to correct the spelling of commands.
Must be set to either correct=cmd, only command name will be corrected,
or correct=all, the whole line will be corrected.
.TP 10
.B dextract 
extract a directory on pushd rather than rotating.
.TP 10
.B edit 
use the input editor, set by default.
.TP 10
.B fignore 
list of file name suffixes (e.g. .o, ~) to ignore during complete.
.TP 10
.B gid
the current real group id.
.TP 10
.B histlit 
If set, history lines in the editor will be shown with its literal value (that
is the line as it was input) instead of the shells lexical version. The current
history line can be toggled between literal and lexical with the
toggle-literal-history function.
History lines saved at shell exit are also saved as this variable indicates.
.TP 10
.B histfile 
If set, it contains the full path-name where a history file is read/written.
It defaults to $home/.history. This is useful when sharing the same home
directory in different machines, or if one wants to save all the histories
in the tty sessions. It is usually set in .cshrc for interactive shells,
because history is sourced between .cshrc and .login so that it is available
from .login.
.TP 10
.B ignore_symlinks 
don't resolve symbolic links to real names on cd, etc.
.TP 10
.B listjobs 
list all jobs when suspending. set listjobs=long, produces long
format.
.TP 10
.B listlinks 
Resolve symbolic links when listing files so that the correct filetype
is shown.
.TP 10
.B listmax 
maximum number of items to list without asking first.
.TP 10
.B matchbeep
control beeping on completion.  With matchbeep=nomatch, completion
only beeps when there is no match, with matchbeep=ambiguous, beeps also
when there are multiple matches, with matchbeep=notunique, beeps when
there is one exact and other longer matches, with matchbeep=never, it
never beeps.
.TP 10
.B nobeep 
Disables beeping completely.
.TP 10
.B oid
The organization id number (Domain OS only).
.TP 10
.B printexitvalue 
if an interactive program exits non-zero, print the
exit value.
.TP 10
.B prompt 
the string to prompt with.
.TP 10
.B prompt2 
the string to prompt for while and for loops with.
.TP 10
.B prompt3
the string to prompt with when automatic spelling correction has
corrected a command line.
.TP 10
.B pushdtohome 
make pushd with no args do a "pushd ~" (like cd does).
.TP 10
.B pushdsilent 
do not print the dir stack on every pushd and popd.
.TP 10
.B recexact 
recognize exact matches even if they are ambiguous.
.TP 10
.B recognize_only_executables 
list choices of commands only displays files
in the path that are executable (slow).
.TP 10
.B rmstar
Prompt the user before execution of `rm *'.
.TP 10
.B savehist 
number of history items to save between login sessions.
.TP 10
.B shlvl
Integer value indicating the number
of nested shells. 
.TP 10
.B showdots 
show hidden files in list and complete operations.
.TP 10
.B tcsh
Contains the current version of the shell as R.VV.PP. The 
.I R
indicates the major release number, the 
.I VV 
the current
version and the 
.I PP
the patchlevel.
.TP 10
.B term 
the terminal type; see above.
.TP 10
.B tperiod 
periodic command wait period (in minutes).
.TP 10
.B tty 
The name of the tty, or empty if not attached to one.
.TP 10
.B uid 
the current real user ID.
.TP 10
.B version 
the version ID stamp for this
.I tcsh.
It contains, the origin of this version of 
.I tcsh, 
the date this version
was released and a string containing a comma separated list of the 
compile time options enabled:
.ta 0.7i 0.9i
.nf
8b 7b	If tcsh was compiled to be eight bit clean 
	or not.  The default is 8b.
nls	Set if tcsh uses the system's NLS, should be
	the default for systems that have NLS.
lf	Set if tcsh should execute .login before 
	.cshrc on login shells. Default is not set.
dl	Set if tcsh should put . last on the path 
	for security. Default is set.
vi	Set if tcsh's default editor is vi. Default 
	is unset (emacs)
dtr	Set if tcsh should drop dtr on login shells 
	when exiting.  Default is unset.
bye	Set if tcsh should accept bye in addition 
	to logout, and rename log to watchlog. 
	Default is unset.
al	Set if tcsh should determine if autologout 
	should be enabled. The default is set.
dir	Set if tcsh should save and restore the directory
	stack.
kan	Set if tcsh is compiled for Kanji. 
	(ignore the iso character set.) Default is unset.
sm	Set if tcsh was compiled to use the system's malloc.
.RE
.DT
.fi
.sp
In addition to the above strings, administrators can 
enter local strings to indicate differences in the local version.

.TP 10
.B visiblebell 
use the visible bell (screen flash) rather than audible bell.
.TP 10
.B watch 
list of events to watch.
.TP 10
.B who
format string for the printouts generated when \fIwatch\fR is set.
.TP 10
.B wordchars 
list of non-alphanumeric characters considered part of a word for the purpose
of the forward-word, backward-word etc functions
-- defaults to "*?_-.[]~=".
.PP
.SH "NEW SPECIAL ALIASES"
.TP 10
.I cwdcmd 
the command is run after every change of working directory.
.TP 10
.I periodic 
the command to be run every \fItperiod\fR minutes.
.TP 10
.I precmd 
the command to be run prior to printing each prompt.
.TP 10
.I beepcmd
the command to be run every time 
.I tcsh
wants to echo the terminal bell. 
.PP
.SH "SEE ALSO"
xterm(1), twm(1), csh(1), chsh(1), termcap(5), termio(7)
.SH BUGS
The screen update for lines longer than the screen width is very poor
if the terminal cannot move the cursor up (i.e. terminal type "dumb").

I am certain that there are bugs.  Bugs (preferably with fixes)
should be sent to Christos Zoulas (christos@ee.cornell.edu).
.PP
.SH VERSION
This man page documents tcsh 6.01.00 (Cornell) 12/19/91.
.PP
.SH AUTHORS
Ken Greer, HP Labs, 1981
.br
Wrote the command completion.
.sp
Mike Ellis, Fairchild, 1983
.br
Added command name recognition/completion.
.sp
Paul Placeway, Ohio State CIS dept., 1983
.br
Added the command line editor.
.sp
Rayan Zachariassen, University of Toronto, 1984
.br
Added the builtin
.I which
feature to the editor, and the code for
.I "ls-F".
Also numerous bug fixes, modifications, and performance enhancements.
.sp
Chris Kingsley, Caltech
.br
Wrote the fast storage allocator routines (nmalloc.c).
.sp
Karl Kleinpaste, CCI 1983-4
.br
Added special aliases, directory stack extraction stuff, login/logout watch,
and scheduled events.  Also came up with the idea of the new prompt format.
.sp
Paul Placeway, Ohio State CIS dept., 1987
.br
Re-wrote the editor, cleaned up
other code, and added the prompt routines, added to the syntax for
file name expressions, and sped up the shell some.
.sp
Chris Grevstad, TRW, 1987
.br
Ported the 4.3 csh sources to tcsh.
.sp
Christos S. Zoulas, Cornell U. EE dept., 1987-91
.br
ported tcsh to HPUX, and System V rel. 2 and 3 and wrote a SysV version of
getwd.c. Added SHORT_STRINGS support. New version of sh.glob.c.
.sp
James J Dempsey, BBN, 1988, and Paul Placeway, OSU, 1988
.br
Re-ported tcsh to A/UX.
.sp
.SH "BUGFIXES AND ENHANCEMENTS"
Scott Krotz, Motorola, 1991
.br
Minix port.
.sp
David Dawes, Sydney U. Australia, Physics dept., 1991
.br
SVR4 job control fixes. (reverse pipeline startup code, and signal fixes).
.sp
Jose Sousa, Interactive Systems Corp., 1991
.br
Extended vi fixes. Added delete command in vi.
.sp
Marc Horowitz, MIT, 1991
.br
Ansification fixes, new exec hashing code, imake fixes, where builtin.
.sp
Eric Schnoebelen, Convex, 1990
.br
Convex support, lots of csh bug fixes, save and restore of directory stack.
.sp
Jaap Vermeulen, Sequent, 1990-91
.br
Vi mode fixes, expand-line, window change fixes, ported to symmetry machines.
.sp
Ron Flax, Apple, 1990
.br
Ported again to A/UX 2.0
.sp
Dan Oscarsson, LTH Sweden, 1990
.br
NLS support and simulated for non NLS sites.
Correction of file names also handles the case when
the / is replaced by another character.
The editor does not switch into cbreak mode unless needed.
The shell will not use character attributes when output is not
to a tty.
.sp
Johan Widen, SICS Sweden, 1990
.br
Shell level variable, mach support, correct-line, 8-bit printing.
.sp
Matt Day, Sanyo Icon, 1990
.br
Added POSIX termio support; Fixed limit stuff for SysV.
.sp
Hans J. Albertsson (Sun Sweden)
.br
Added the ampm variable handling, DING!, and the settc and telltc builtins.
.sp
Michael Bloom
.br
Fixed some of the interrupt handling.
.sp
Michael Fine, Digital Equipment Corp
.br
added the extended key support.
.sp
Daniel Long, NNSC, 1988
.br
Added the wordchars variable.
.sp
George Hartzell, MCD Biology, University of Colorado-Boulder, 1988
.br
Fixed the always resetting to DEL bug.
.sp
Patrick Wolfe, Kuck and Associates, Inc., 1988
.br
Cleaned up VI mode and wrote the new editor description (in section
1).
.sp
Jak Kirman, 1988
.br
Fixed the SunOS 4 giant stack allocation bug.
.sp
Bruce Robertson, Tektronix, 1989
.br
Fixed setting erase and kill (again).
.sp
David C Lawrence, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, 1989
.br
Added "autolist" variable and code to list possibilities on ambiguous
completion.
.sp
Martin Boyer, Institut de recherche d'Hydro-Quebec, 1991.
.br
Modified "autolist" variable and code to give options on beeping
behavior.  Modified the history search to search for the whole string
from the beginning of the line to the cursor.
.sp
Alec Wolman, DEC, 1989
.br
Added code to allow newlines in the prompt.
.sp
Matt Landau, BBN, 1989
.br
Fixed YP bugs on Suns, added .tcshrc stuff.
.sp
Ray Moody, Purdue Physics, 1989
.br
Added the code to do magic spacebar history expansion.
.sp
Mordechai ????, Intel, 1989
.br
Re-arranged the printprompt() routine to use a switch(*cp) (rather than
a bunch of ifs), and added a few things to it.
.sp
Josh Siegel, dspo.gov, 1989
.br
Fixed "fg-editor" and added the status line shell variables "sl" and "el".
.sp
Karl Berry, UMB, 1989
.br
Fixed a bug involving environ (in sh.func.c) on NeXT computers.
.sp
Michael Greim, Universitaet des Saarlandes, Saarbruecken, W-Germany,
.br
Fixed the nested backquote bug (yes, you can do it; think about
aliases) in 4.2 csh.  This fix was posted to comp.bugs.4bsd.
.sp
Kazuhiro Honda, Department of Computer Science, Keio University, 1989
.br
Added the code for automatic spelling correction, the prompt3 stuff
(the autocorrect prompt), and HOSTTYPE symbols for the Sony NEWS.
.sp
Paul Placeway, BBN, 1990
.br
Fixed character redrawing code insert bugs, and made redrawing code
handle multiple character movement, insert, and delete (if it exists).
Fixed setting of SHELL.
.sp
Per Hedeland, Ellemtel, Sweden, 1990
.br
Various bugfixes and improvements, e.g. in history expansion, autolist,
added autoexpand, updated the manual.
.SH "THANKS TO"
A special thanks to: Bryan Dunlap, Clayton Elwell, Karl Kleinpaste,
Bob Manson, Steve Romig,
Diana Smetters, Bob Sutterfield, Mark Verber, Elizabeth Zwicky, and
all the other people at Ohio State for suggestions and encouragement.
.sp
Also, thanks to all the people on the net for putting up with,
reporting bugs in, and suggesting new additions to the old tcsh
editor.
