.\" Copyright (c) 1989, 1990 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" Copyright (c) 1990 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms are permitted provided
.\" that: (1) source distributions retain this entire copyright notice and
.\" comment, and (2) distributions including binaries display the following
.\" acknowledgement:  ``This product includes software developed by the
.\" University of California, Berkeley and its contributors'' in the
.\" documentation or other materials provided with the distribution and in
.\" all advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software.
.\" Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors may
.\" be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\" specific prior written permission.
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'' AND WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)whatis.1	6.7 (Berkeley) 6/24/90
.\"
.TH WHATIS 1 "%Q"
.UC 4
.SH NAME
whatis \- describe what a command is
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.ft B
whatis [-M path] [-m path] command ...
.ft R
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Whatis
looks up a given command and gives the header line from the manual page.
You can then use the
.IR man (1)
command to get more information.
.PP
The options are as follows:
.TP
.I M
Override the list of standard directories where
.I whatis
searches for its database named ``whatis.db''.
The supplied
.I path
must be a colon (``:'') separated list of directories.
This search path may also be set using the environment variable
.IR MANPATH .
.TP
.I m
Augment the list of standard directories where
.I whatis
searches for its database named ``whatis.db''.
The supplied
.I path
must be a colon (``:'') separated list of directories.
These directories will be searched before the standard directories
or the directories supplied with the
.I M
option or the
.I MANPATH
environment variable are searched.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.I MANPATH
The standard search path used by
.I man
may be overridden by specifying a path in the
.I MANPATH
environment variable.
The format of the path is a colon (``:'') separated list of directories.
.SH FILES
whatis.db		name of the whatis database
.SH "SEE ALSO"
apropos(1), man(1), whereis(1)
