.TH BJ 6 
.SH NAME
bj \- the game of black jack
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B /usr/games/bj
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Bj
is a serious attempt at
simulating the dealer
in the game of black jack (or twenty-one)
as might be found in Reno.
The following rules apply:
.HP 5
The bet is $2 every hand.
.IP
A player `natural' (black jack) pays $3.
A dealer natural loses $2.
Both dealer and player naturals
is a `push' (no money exchange).
.IP
If the dealer has an ace up,
the player is allowed to make an `insurance'
bet against the chance of a dealer natural.
If this bet is not taken, play resumes as normal.
If the bet is taken, it is a side bet
where the player wins $2 if the dealer has
a natural and loses $1 if the dealer does not.
.IP
If the player is dealt two cards
of the same value, he is allowed to
`double'.
He is allowed to play two
hands, each with one of these cards.
(The bet is doubled also; $2 on each hand.)
.IP
If a dealt hand
has a total of ten or eleven,
the player may `double down'.
He may double the bet ($2 to $4)
and receive exactly one more card on that hand.
.IP
Under normal play,
the player may `hit' (draw a card)
as long as his total is not over twenty-one.
If the player `busts' (goes over twenty-one),
the dealer wins the bet.
.IP
When the player `stands' (decides not to hit),
the dealer hits until he attains
a total of seventeen or more.
If the dealer busts, the player wins the bet.
.IP
If both player and dealer stand,
the one with the largest total wins.
A tie is a push.
.PP
The machine deals and keeps score.
The following questions will be asked at
appropriate times.
Each question is
answered by
.B y
followed by a new line for `yes',
or just new line for `no'.
.PP
?		(means, `do you want a hit?')
.br
Insurance?
.br
Double down?
.PP
Every time the deck is shuffled,
the dealer so states and the `action' (total bet)
and `standing' (total won or lost)
is printed.
To exit, hit the interrupt key (DEL)
and the action and standing will be printed.
