.\" Copyright (c) 1986 Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.  The Berkeley software License Agreement
.\" specifies the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.\"
.\"	@(#)cy.4	6.1 (Berkeley) %G%
.\"
.TH CY 4 ""
.UC 7
.SH NAME
cy \- Cipher/tapemaster magtape interface
.SH SYNOPSIS
tapemaster0 at vba address ff4000 
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
The Cipher F880, M990/Tapemaster combination provides a standard tape drive
interface as described in
.IR mt (4).
The Cipher F880 tape drive operates at 1600 or 3200 bpi - controlled by a switch on the drive. The Cipher M990 operates at 1600,3200 or 6250 bpi - controlled by switches on the front of the drive.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
mt(1), tar(1), mt(4)
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Listed below are all possible error messages and an explanation of what
the messages mean. Any comment related to hardware problems is in no way
definitive or complete. Every error will produce one or more messages.
Some errors, such as tape is write protected, are displayed on the user's terminal. All system errors are also displayed on the system console with the status that caused the drive to fail.
.br
The meaning of the status fields are:
.sp 1
.in +0.1i
.nf
 7      0 15     8
+--------|--------+
|||||||||||||||||||
+-----------------+
 ^^^^^^^^ ^^^^---^
 |||||||| ||||
 |||||||| |||+---- ERROR - This 5-bit field specifies an error
 |||||||| |||              code when a non-recoverable error is
 |||||||| |||              encountered.
 |||||||| ||+----- E     - (Enter) The Parameter Block has been
 |||||||| ||               entered and execution has been begun.
 |||||||| |+------ C     - (Complete) The TAPEMASTER has
 |||||||| |                successfully completed the command.
 |||||||| +------- R	- (Retry) At least one retry was executed
 ||||||||                  by the TAPEMASTER during this command.
 |||||||+---------       - Unused.
 ||||||+---------- P	- (Write Protect) The tape does not have
 ||||||                    a write enable ring.
 |||||+----------- FB	- (Formatter Busy) The Formatter is busy.
 ||||+------------ R	- (Ready) The selected drive is ready.
 |||+------------- EOT	- (End of Tape)The EOT marker was detected.
 ||+-------------- LP	- (Load Point) The tape is at load point.
 |+--------------- OL	- (On Line) The drive is On Line.
 +---------------- FM	- (Filemark) A filemark was detected on
                           this operation.
.fi
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in -0.2i
Error messages will be displayed with the drive number (# stands for number), the message and its error code.
.sp 1
	\fBcy#: Drive timed out during transfer\fP.            
.br
Time out errors during transfer; this may be due to trying to read a blank tape or the controller failing to interrupt or the drive dropping off-line ... (Error:01-05)\fR 
.sp1
	\fBcy#: Tape is write protected\fP.
.br
An attempt was made to write on the tape drive when no write ring was present; this message is written only on the terminal of the user who tried to access the tape. (Error:11)\fR
.sp1
	\fBcy#: Drive is not on-line\fP.
.br
An attempt was made to access the tape while it was offline; this message is written only on the terminal of the user who tried to access the tape. (Error:10)\fR
.sp1
\fB	cy#: Controller referenced non-existent system memory\fP.
A memory time-out occurred during a system memory reference. (Error:06)\fR.
.sp1
\fB	cy#: Controller diagnostics failed\fP.
.br
An error occurred in the micro-diagnostics or the diagnostic mode jumper was not installed while attempting to execute a Diagnostics command. (Error:08,13)\fR
.sp1
\fB	cy#: Unsatisfactory media found\fP.
.br
A tape time-out occured, because the tape drive did not supply an expected read or write strobe. This normally occurs when attempting to read a larger record than was written. It may also occur during a write due to a damaged tape. This message is written on the terminal of the user who tried to access the tape. (Error:0F)\fR
.sp1
	\fBcy#: Checksum error in controller proms\fP.
.br
An error was detected while calculating a checksum on the PROM. (Error:0E)\fR
.sp1
\fB	cy#: Unrecoverable media error during read\fP.
.br
A hard or soft error occurred which could not eliminated by retry. (Error:0A)\fR
.sp1
\fB	cy#: Unrecoverable tape parity error\fP.
.br
A read parity error occurred on the byte interface between the drive and the TAPEMASTER. (Error:0D)\fR 
.sp1
\fB	cy#: Blank tape found (data expected)\fP.
.br
Blank tape was encountered where data was expected. (Error:07)\fR
.sp1
.sp1
\fB****Tapemaster controller time-out during initialization!****\fP
.br
Tapemaster controller failed to acknowledge the first attention while initializing the tape parameter blocks.\fP
.sp1
\fR****Tapemaster configuration failure!****\fP
.br
Tapemaster failed while initializng the on-board registers, memory and calculate the buffer space which is available for buffered operations.\fP
.sp1
\fR****Unrecoverble hardware error****\fP
.br
An unrecoverable hardware error occured. Controller or drive failure!!\fP
.sp1
The following are Warning messages:
.sp1
	\fRcy#: # cm of tape were used for recovering bad spots.\fP
.br
Displays the number of centimeters of tape that were skipped over while retrying due to bad spots on the tape.\fP
.sp1
	\fRcy#: Maximum block size is #!\fP
.br
Specified block size exceeded the displayed maximum block size.\fP

BUGS
