.\" Copyright (c) 1980, 1990 Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)lxref.1	6.3 (Berkeley) 5/6/91
.\"
.Dd May 6, 1991
.Dt LXREF 1
.Os BSD 4
.Sh NAME
.Nm lxref
.Nd lisp cross reference program
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm lxref
.Op Fl Ns Ar N
.Ar xref\-file ...
.Op Fl a Ar source\-file ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm Lxref
reads cross reference file(s) written by the lisp compiler
.Xr liszt 1
and prints a cross reference listing on the standard output.
.Xr Liszt 1
will create a cross reference file during compilation when it is
given the
.Fl x
switch.
Cross reference files usually end in
.Pa \&.x
and consequently
.Nm lxref
will append a
.Pa \&.x
to the file names given if necessary.
.Pp
Options and arguments:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl Ar N
The value
.Ar N
(a decimal integer)
sets the
.Em ignorelevel .
If a function is called more than
.Em ignorelevel
times, the cross reference listing will just print the number of calls
instead of listing each one of them.
The default for
.Em ignorelevel
is 50.
.It Fl a Ar source(s)
Put limited cross reference information in the
.Ar source(s)
named.
.Nm lxref
will scan the source and when it comes across a definition of a function
(that is a line beginning with
.Li "`(def'"
it will preceed that line with a list of the functions which call this
function, written as a comment preceeded by
.Li "`;.. '".
All existing lines beginning with
.Li "`;.. '"
will be removed from the file.
If the source file contains a line beginning
.Li "`;.-'"
then this will disable this annotation process from this point on until a
.Li "`;.+'"
is seen (however, lines beginning with
.Li "`;.. '"
will continue to be deleted).
After the annoation is done, the original file
.Pa foo.l
is renamed to
.Pa #.foo.l
and the new file with annotation is named
.Pa foo.l
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr lisp 1 ,
.Xr liszt 1
.Sh HISTORY
.Nm Lxref
appeared in
.Bx 4.0 .
