.TH XNEST 8 "9 January 1986" "X Version 10"
.SH NAME
Xnest - Recursive X window system implementation
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
This implementation allows you to run an X server in a window of another
X server.  Full functionality is supported.  The number of planes provided
by this pseudo-device is the same as the underlying device.  The cursor
sizes, tile sizes, and brush sizes supported are also the same.  The number
of color cells provided is specified with a \fI.Xdefaults\fP option.
.PP
Aside from being a good hack, this implementation exists primarily to aid
system developers when debugging the device-independent portion of the
server.  The debugging can be accomplished without requiring a second
physical display.
.PP
Exposures on (and resizings of) the window are ignored, and so corrupt the
"screen".
.SH X DEFAULTS
.PP
Accepts the following defaults (for the program "X", not "Xnest"):
.PP
.TP 8
.B BorderWidth
Set the border width of the window.
.PP
.TP 8
.B Border
Set the border color.
.PP
.TP 8
.B CellExponent
If not set or set to zero, a monochrome psuedo-display is created.
Otherwise, if a value of N is provided, specifies the maximum number color
cells to be 2^N.  The number actually provided will be a power of two,
but may be less than 2^N if allocation fails.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
Uses the environment variable ``DISPLAY'' to specify which display to use.
.PP
.SH "SEE ALSO"
X(8c), X(1)
.br
`ddX - Device Dependent X Interface'
.SH AUTHOR
.br
Bob Scheifler, MIT Laboratory for Computer Science
.br
Copyright (c) 1986, by Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
