.TH XSUN 8 "2 February 1986" "X Version 10"
.SH NAME
Xsun - X window system Sun workstation implementation notes
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
The Sun X server cannot be started by
\fIinit(8)\fP ;
it must be started as a command from the normal login shell.
It takes two mandatory command line arguments,
the first being the file name of the frame buffer (typically
.IR /dev/fb ,
special case "0" interpreted as
.IR /dev/fb )
and the second being 0:
.sp
	Xsun /dev/fb 0
.sp
The Sun X server will normally be started by
.IR xinit (1).
.PP
The initial Sun drivers use the
.B -lpixrect
library to address the device,  and will thus run on Sun 1 and Sun 2
monochrome and color displays.
The drivers will work with either the 2.0 or 3.0 versions of the Sun
system.
.PP
The Sun X server looks for its fonts in a default path of directories,
which can be overridden by the XFONTPATH environment variable.  This is
a colon-separated list of directories,  in which ~ can be used to
indicate the user's $HOME.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
X(8c), X(1), xinit(1)
.br
`Xlib - C Language X Interface'
`ddX - Device Dependent X Interface'
.SH FILES
.br
/tmp/X*	Unix domain socket
.SH AUTHORS
David Rosenthal
.br
James Gosling
.br
Copyright (c) 1986 by Sun Microsystems.
.sp
We would like to acknowledge generous help from Jim Gettys and Bob
Scheifler.
.SH BUGS
.PP
The X server on the Sun maintains the cursor image itself;  it does not
use the kernel mouse tracking.  The implementation is designed to keep
the cursor in the bitmap as much as possible,  at the cost of
additional computation.  An alternative implementation that delayed
replacing the cursor until the server was about to block would have
much lower overhead. The design decision was based on experience with a
range of implementations in Carnegie-Mellon's
.I Andrew
window manager;  users seemed to prefer a cursor that was slower but
didn't flash so much.
.PP
Get and put operations on non-constant color Pixmaps with even widths will be
significantly faster than on those with odd widths;  this is due to a
mis-match between the alignment restrictions of X and the Sun pixrect
library.
.PP
The server can address only one display;  this is a restriction of the
X system itself and is not likely to change soon.
.PP
The drivers at present have a number of restrictions,  most of which
should be removed in future versions with a little effort:
.IP \-
Sun 1 color displays untested;  they will probably do strange things to text,
cursors,  etc.
.IP \-
Dashed lines will be drawn as solid.
.IP \-
Brush shapes are not implemented;  the brush track will be drawn as a
solid line.
.IP \-
Tile filling with a bitmap (i.e. not a constant Pixmap) through an xymask is
not implemented.
.IP \-
Filling a polygon is not implemented.
.IP \-
Up events are not available for any keys on the keyboard.
.IP \-
Down events are not available for the SHIFT/SHIFT_LOCK/CTRL/META keys.
.IP \-
No SHIFT_LOCK key is defined.
.IP \-
On the 2.X kernel (but not the 3.0 kernel),
the META key is defined in a restricted way.  It is possible to type
meta-characters,  but not possible to receive meta-buttons from the mouse.
.IP \-
The function keys generate the standard ASCII escape sequences,  they
are not available as individual keys.
.IP \-
The "feep" (audible bell) function on the Sun defaults to minimum intensity.
.IP \-
There are differences in transfer function between the Sun/2 and uVAX color
displays;  the
.I /usr/lib/rgb
database should be display-dependent.
.IP \- 
It should be possible to use ~name to indicate another user's $HOME in
the XFONTPATH variable.
.IP \-
Font loading is slow,  because of the need to convert from strike to
bitmap format,  swap bytes,  invert pixel order and so on.
It should be possible to use both Sun and X fonts;  loading Sun fonts would
be faster.
