.TH XWD 1 "27 July 1985" "X Version 10"
.SH NAME
xwd - X Window System, window image dumper.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B "xwd"
[ -debug ] [ -help ] [ -nobdrs ] [ -out \fIfile\fP ] [ -z ] [ \fIhost\fP:\fIdisplay\fP ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.I Xwd
is an X Window System window image dumping utility.
.I Xwd
allows X users to store window images in a specially formated
window dump file.  This file can then  be  read  by  various  other  X
utilities for redisplay, printing, editing, formatting, archiving,
image processing etc..  The target window is selected by clicking the 
mouse   in   the  desired  window.   The keyboard bell is rung once
at the beginning of the dump and twice when the dump is completed.
This is a preliminary version of what promises to be a very useful utility.
The  window dump file format is currently under development no guarantee of
upward compatibility is made.
.SH ARGUMENT SUMMARY
.PP
.TP 8
.B "-help"
Print out the `Usage:' command syntax summary.
.PP
.TP 8
.B "-nobdrs"
This argument specifies that the window dump  should  not  include  the
pixels that compose the X window border.  This is useful in situations
where you may wish to include the  window  contents in a document 
as an illustration.
.PP
.TP 8
.B "-out \fIfile\fP"
This argument allows the user to explicitly specify the output
file on the command line.  The default is to output to standard out.
.PP
.TP 8
.B "-z"
This argument specifies that the output file should be in  `Z'  pixmap
format.    The   default  is  `XY'  pixmap format.  `Z' format is only
valid on color displays.
.PP
.TP 8
.B "\fIhost\fP:\fIdisplay\fP"
This  argument  allow  you  to  specify the host and display number on
which to find the target window.  For example `xwd orpheus:1'
would specify that the target window is on display `1' on the machine
`orpheus'.  By default,
.I xwd
uses the host and display number stored in the environment variable
DISPLAY, and therefore this argument is not normally specified.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.PP
.TP 8
.B DISPLAY
To get default host and display number.
.SH FILES
.PP
.TP 8
.B XWDFile.h
X Window Dump File format definition file.
.SH FUTURE PLANS
If time ever presents itself...
.PP
.TP 8
.B 1.
Install complete color support.
.PP
.TP 8
.B 2.
Completely rework the `XWDFile' dump file format.
.PP
.TP 8
.B 3.
Completely rework the corresponding xwud window undumper program.
.SH SEE ALSO
xwud(1), xpr(1), xdpr(1), X(1)
.SH AUTHOR
.PP
Copyright 1985, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
.PP
Tony Della Fera, Digital Equipment Corp., MIT Project Athena
