.\" Copyright (c) 1980, 1990 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" %sccs.include.redist.man%
.\"
.\"     @(#)lisp.1	6.2 (Berkeley) %G%
.\"
.Dd 
.Dt LISP 1
.Os BSD 4
.Sh NAME
.Nm lisp
.Nd lisp interpreter
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm lisp
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm Lisp
is a lisp interpreter for a dialect which
closely resembles MIT's MACLISP.
This lisp, known as FRANZ
LISP, features
an I/O facility which allows the user to change the input
and output syntax, add
macro characters, and maintain compatibility with upper-case
only lisp systems;
infinite precision integer arithmetic, and
an error facility which allows the user to trap system errors in
many different ways.
Interpreted functions may be mixed with code compiled by
.Xr liszt  1
and both may be debugged using the
``Joseph Lister'' trace package.
A
.Nm lisp
containing compiled and interpreted code may be dumped into
a file for later use.
.Pp
There are too many functions to list here; one should refer to the
manuals listed below.
.Sh AUTHORS
An early version was written by Jeff Levinsky, Mike Curry, and John Breedlove.
Keith Sklower wrote and is maintaining the current version,
with the assistance of John Foderaro.
The garbage collector was implemented by Bill Rowan.
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Nm Lisp
checks these
environment variables;
.Ev PATH ,
.Ev SHELL
and
.Ev TERM .
.Sh FILES
.Dw /usr/lib/lisp/toplevel.l
.Di L
.Dp Pa /usr/lib/lisp/trace.l
Joseph Lister trace package
.Dp Pa /usr/lib/lisp/toplevel.l
top level read-eval-print loop
.Dp
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr liszt 1 ,
.Xr lxref 1
.br
.Em FRANZ LISP  Manual,
Version 1
by John K.
Foderaro
.br
MACLISP Manual
.Sh HISTORY
.Nm Lisp
appeared in 3 BSD.
.Sh BUGS
The error system is in a state of flux and not all error messages are
as informative as they could be.
