.\" Copyright (c) 1986 Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.  The Berkeley software License Agreement
.\" specifies the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.\"
.\"	@(#)autoconf.4	6.1 (Berkeley) %G%
.\"
.TH AUTOCONF 4 ""
.UC 7
.SH NAME
autoconf \- diagnostics from autoconfiguartion code
.SH DESCRIPTION
When UNIX bootstraps it probes the innards of the machine it is running
on and locates controllers, drives, and other devices, printing out
what it finds on the console.  This procedure is driven by a system
configuration table which is processed by
.IR config (8)
and compiled into each kernel.
.PP
VERSABUS devices are located by probing to see if their control-status
registers respond.  If not, they are silently ignored.  If the control
status register responds but the device cannot be made to interrupt,
a diagnostic warning will be printed on the console and the device
will not be available to the system.
.PP
A generic system may be built which picks its root device at boot time
as the ``best'' available device.
If such a system is booted with the RB_ASKNAME option of (see
.IR reboot (2v)),
then the name of the root device is read from the console terminal at boot
time, and any available device may be used.
.SH SEE ALSO
config(8)
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.PP
\fB%s%d at vba address %o vec %o\fR.  The device %s%d, e.g. fsd0
was found on the bus at control-status register address %o and with
device vector %o.
.PP
\fB%s%d at vba address %o didn't interrupt\fR.  The device did not interrupt,
likely because it is broken, hung, or not the kind of device it is advertised
to be.
.PP
\fB%s%d at %s%d slave %d\fR.
Which would look like ``smd0 at vd0 slave 0'',
where \fBsmd0\fR is the name of a disk drive and \fBvd0\fR is the name
of the controller.
.SH BUGS
