.\" Copyright (c) 1983 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms are permitted
.\" provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
.\" duplicated in all such forms and that any documentation,
.\" advertising materials, and other materials related to such
.\" distribution and use acknowledge that the software was developed
.\" by the University of California, Berkeley.  The name of the
.\" University may not be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\" from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'' AND WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.\"
.\"	@(#)connect.2	6.7 (Berkeley) 2/14/89
.\"
.TH CONNECT 2 "February 14, 1989"
.UC 5
.SH NAME
connect \- initiate a connection on a socket
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.ft B
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <sys/socket.h>
.PP
.ft B
connect(s, name, namelen)
int s;
struct sockaddr *name;
int namelen;
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The parameter
.I s
is a socket.
If it is of type SOCK_DGRAM,
then this call specifies the peer with which the socket is to be associated;
this address is that to which datagrams are to be sent,
and the only address from which datagrams are to be received.
If the socket is of type SOCK_STREAM,
then this call attempts to make a connection to
another socket.
The other socket is specified by
.I name,
which is an address in the communications space of the socket.
Each communications space interprets the
.I name
parameter in its own way.
Generally, stream sockets may successfully
.I connect
only once; datagram sockets may use
.I connect
multiple times to change their association.
Datagram sockets may dissolve the association
by connecting to an invalid address, such as a null address.
.SH "RETURN VALUE
If the connection or binding succeeds, then 0 is returned.
Otherwise a \-1 is returned, and a more specific error
code is stored in \fIerrno\fP.
.SH "ERRORS
The call fails if:
.TP 20
[EBADF]
.I S
is not a valid descriptor.
.TP 20
[ENOTSOCK]
.I S
is a descriptor for a file, not a socket.
.TP 20
[EADDRNOTAVAIL]
The specified address is not available on this machine.
.TP 20
[EAFNOSUPPORT]
Addresses in the specified address family cannot be used with this socket.
.TP 20
[EISCONN]
The socket is already connected.
.TP 20
[ETIMEDOUT]
Connection establishment timed out without establishing a connection.
.TP 20
[ECONNREFUSED]
The attempt to connect was forcefully rejected.
.TP 20
[ENETUNREACH]
The network isn't reachable from this host.
.TP 20
[EADDRINUSE]
The address is already in use.
.TP 20
[EFAULT]
The \fIname\fP parameter specifies an area outside
the process address space.
.TP 20
[EINPROGRESS]
The socket is non-blocking 
and the connection cannot
be completed immediately.
It is possible to
.IR select (2)
for completion by selecting the socket for writing.
.TP 20
[EALREADY]
The socket is non-blocking
and a previous connection attempt
has not yet been completed.
.PP
The following errors are specific to connecting names in the UNIX domain.
These errors may not apply in future versions of the UNIX IPC domain.
.TP 15
[ENOTDIR]
A component of the path prefix is not a directory.
.TP 15
[EINVAL]
The pathname contains a character with the high-order bit set.
.TP 15
[ENAMETOOLONG]
A component of a pathname exceeded 255 characters,
or an entire path name exceeded 1023 characters.
.TP 15
[ENOENT]
The named socket does not exist.
.TP 15
[EACCES]
Search permission is denied for a component of the path prefix.
.TP 15
[EACCES]
Write access to the named socket is denied.
.TP 15
[ELOOP]
Too many symbolic links were encountered in translating the pathname.
.SH SEE ALSO
accept(2), select(2), socket(2), getsockname(2)
