.\" Copyright (c) 1983 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms are permitted
.\" provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
.\" duplicated in all such forms and that any documentation,
.\" advertising materials, and other materials related to such
.\" distribution and use acknowledge that the software was developed
.\" by the University of California, Berkeley.  The name of the
.\" University may not be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\" from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'' AND WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.\"
.\"	@(#)getsockname.2	6.2 (Berkeley) 2/14/89
.\"
.TH GETSOCKNAME 2 "February 14, 1989"
.UC 5
.SH NAME
getsockname \- get socket name
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.PP
.ft B
getsockname(s, name, namelen)
int s;
struct sockaddr *name;
int *namelen;
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Getsockname
returns the current 
.I name
for the specified socket.  The
.I namelen
parameter should be initialized to indicate
the amount of space pointed to by
.IR name .
On return it contains the actual size of the name
returned (in bytes).
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
A 0 is returned if the call succeeds, \-1 if it fails.
.SH ERRORS
The call succeeds unless:
.TP 15
[EBADF]
The argument \fIs\fP is not a valid descriptor.
.TP 15
[ENOTSOCK]
The argument \fIs\fP is a file, not a socket.
.TP 15
[ENOBUFS]
Insufficient resources were available in the system
to perform the operation.
.TP 15
[EFAULT]
The 
.I name
parameter points to memory not in a valid part of the
process address space.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
bind(2), socket(2)
.SH BUGS
Names bound to sockets in the UNIX domain are inaccessible;
.I getsockname
returns a zero length name.
