.\" Copyright (c) 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	@(#)MAKEDEV.8	8.1 (Berkeley) 6/5/93
.\"
.TH MAKEDEV 8 "June 5, 1993"
.UC 7
.SH NAME
MAKEDEV \- create system and device special files
.SH SYNOPSIS
MAKEDEV name ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
The shell script
.IR MAKEDEV ,
found in the ``/dev'' directory, is used to create the common special
files.
See
.IR special (8)
for a more complete discussion of special files.
.PP
.I MAKEDEV
takes any number of device names as arguments, where the names are
the common abbreviation for the device.
There are two special devices, ``std'' and ``local''.
The former creates the standard devices for the architecture.
The latter is for devices specific to the local site, and
executes the shell file ``MAKEDEV.local''.
.PP
The VAX supports the following devices.
Where a device name is followed by a hash sign (``#''), the hash sign
must be replaced by a unit number.
.TP 10
std
the standard devices (console, crl, csa1, csa2, drum, fd/*, floppy,
kUmem, klog, kmem, mem, null, stderr, stdin, stdout, tty, tu0, tu1)
.br
.ns
.TP 10
local
configuration specific devices
.br
.ns
.TP 10
ad#
unibus interface to data translation a/d converter
.br
.ns
.TP 10
ct#
unibus parallel interface to CAT typesetter
.br
.ns
.TP 10
dh#
unibus dh11 and emulations (e.g. Able dmax, Emulex cs-11)
.br
.ns
.TP 10
dhu#
unibus dhu11
.br
.ns
.TP 10
dmf#
unibus dmf32
.br
.ns
.TP 10
dmz#
unibus dmz32
.br
.ns
.TP 10
dn#
unibus dn11 and emulations (e.g. Able Quadracall)
.br
.ns
.TP 10
dz#
unibus dz11 and dz32
.br
.ns
.TP 10
hk#
unibus rk06 and rk07
.br
.ns
.TP 10
hp#
massbus rm??
.br
.ns
.TP 10
ht#
massbus tm03 & tu??
.br
.ns
.TP 10
ik#
unibus interface to ikonas frame buffer
.br
.ns
.TP 10
kra#
bi kdb50 w/ ra??
.br
.ns
.TP 10
lp#
unibus lp11 parallel interface
.br
.ns
.TP 10
mt#
massbus tu78
.br
.ns
.TP 10
np#
unibus ethernet co-processor interface, for downloading.
.br
.ns
.TP 10
ps#
unibus interface to e&s picture system 2
.br
.ns
.TP 10
pty#
set of 16 master and slave pseudo terminals
.br
.ns
.TP 10
qv#
qvss (microvax) display
.br
.ns
.TP 10
ra#
unibus uda50 w/ ra??
.br
.ns
.TP 10
rb#
730 idc w/ rb80 and/or rb02
.br
.ns
.TP 10
rl#
unibus rl02
.br
.ns
.TP 10
rx#
unibus rx211 floppy disk 
.br
.ns
.TP 10
tm#
unibus tm11 & te10 emulations (e.g. Emulex tc-11)
.br
.ns
.TP
tms#
unibus/qbus TMSCP (e.g. TU81, TK50)
.br
.ns
.TP 10
ts#
unibus ts11
.br
.ns
.TP 10
ttyv0
qvss (microvax) display reserved pty
.br
.ns
.TP 10
up#
other unibus devices (e.g. on Emulex sc-21v controller)
.br
.ns
.TP 10
ut#
unibus tu45 emulations (e.g.si 9700)
.br
.ns
.TP 10
uu#
tu58 cassettes on dl11 controller
.br
.ns
.TP 10
va#
unibus varian parallel interface
.br
.ns
.TP 10
vp#
unibus versatec parallel interface
.SH FILES
/dev		The special file directory.
.SH SEE ALSO
.IR mknod (1), 
.IR intro (4),
.IR config (8),
.IR special (8)
