.\" This source code is a product of Sun Microsystems, Inc. and is provided
.\" for unrestricted use provided that this legend is included on all tape
.\" media and as a part of the software program in whole or part.  Users
.\" may copy or modify this source code without charge, but are not authorized
.\" to license or distribute it to anyone else except as part of a product or
.\" program developed by the user.
.\"
.\" THIS PROGRAM CONTAINS SOURCE CODE COPYRIGHTED BY SUN MICROSYSTEMS, INC.
.\" SUN MICROSYSTEMS, INC., MAKES NO REPRESENTATIONS ABOUT THE SUITABLITY
.\" OF SUCH SOURCE CODE FOR ANY PURPOSE.  IT IS PROVIDED "AS IS" WITHOUT
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTY OF ANY KIND.  SUN MICROSYSTEMS, INC. DISCLAIMS
.\" ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO SUCH SOURCE CODE, INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  IN
.\" NO EVENT SHALL SUN MICROSYSTEMS, INC. BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING
.\" FROM USE OF SUCH SOURCE CODE, REGARDLESS OF THE THEORY OF LIABILITY.
.\" 
.\" This source code is provided with no support and without any obligation on
.\" the part of Sun Microsystems, Inc. to assist in its use, correction, 
.\" modification or enhancement.
.\"
.\" SUN MICROSYSTEMS, INC. SHALL HAVE NO LIABILITY WITH RESPECT TO THE
.\" INFRINGEMENT OF COPYRIGHTS, TRADE SECRETS OR ANY PATENTS BY THIS
.\" SOURCE CODE OR ANY PART THEREOF.
.\"
.\" Sun Microsystems, Inc.
.\" 2550 Garcia Avenue
.\" Mountain View, California 94043
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1991 Sun Microsystems, Inc.
.\"
.\" @(#)ldconfig.8 1.3 88/02/25 SMI
.TH LDCONFIG 8 "28 November 1987"
.SH NAME
ldconfig \- link-editor configuration
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B /usr/etc/ldconfig
[
.I directory 
\ ... ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.IX "ldconfig command" "" "\fLldconfig\fP \(em configure link-editor"
.IX "ldconfig command" "" "shared library cache"
.B ldconfig
is used to configure a performance-enhancing cache for the run-time
link-editor,
.BR ld.so .
It is run from
.B /etc/rc.local
and periodically via
.B cron
to avoid linking with stale libraries.  It should be also be run manually
when a new shared object (e.g., a shared library) is installed on the system.
.LP
When invoked with no arguments, a default set of directories are built
into the cache \- these are the directories searched by default by the
link editors.  Additional directories may be specified on the command
line.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 20
.B /etc/ld.so.cache
holds the cached data.
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ld (1)
