.TH NFDUMP 8 "University of Illinois"
.SH NAME
nfdump, nfload - notesfile dump/load programs
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B "nfdump"
notesfile
.PP
.B "nfload"
[
.BI "-D" directory
]
notesfile
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Nfdump
and 
.I nfload
are used to convert notesfile data base formats.
.PP
.I Nfdump
converts the specified notesfile to a portable ASCII format
and writes it to
standard output.
Some diagnostics are produced on stderr.
.I Nfdump
can be run by any user;
access to a particular notesfile is governed by that notesfile's
access list.
.PP
.I Nfload
is used on the output from 
.I nfdump
to create a new notesfile.
The 
.B -D
option specifies an alternate base directory for the notesfile.
If unspecified, this defaults to
``/usr/spool/notes''.
.I Nfload
reads standard input for the ASCII representation of the notesfile.
.PP
Typical use of these two programs occurs when converting an existing
notesfile data base to a new format.
The 
.I nfdump
program should be compiled with the older structure definitions
while
.I nfload
is compiled with the newer structures.
The data base can then be converted with a shell script of the
following nature:
.sp
.nf
	mkdir .OLD
	mv * .OLD
	for i in `ls .OLD`
	do
		echo $i start
		nfdump $i | nfload -D/usr/spool/newnotes $i
	done
		echo $i done
	echo ALL DONE
	rm -rf .OLD
.fi
.sp
This assumes that the old data base is in ``/usr/spool/notes''
and the new data base is to be placed in ``/usr/spool/newnotes''.
After the conversion is complete, one can move
the old data base from ``/usr/spool/notes'' to ``/usr/spool/oldformat''
and the new data base from ``/usr/spool/newnotes'' to ``/usr/spool/notes''.
.SH FILES
.SH SEE ALSO
notes(1),
.br
.ul
The Notesfile Reference Manual
.SH AUTHORS
.nf
Ray Essick (uiucdcs!essick, essick%uiuc@csnet-relay.arpa)
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL
.sp
Rob Kolstad (kolstad@convex.UUCP)
CONVEX Computer Corporation
Richardson, TX
.fi
