.\" Copyright (c) 1983 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms are permitted provided
.\" that: (1) source distributions retain this entire copyright notice and
.\" comment, and (2) distributions including binaries display the following
.\" acknowledgement:  ``This product includes software developed by the
.\" University of California, Berkeley and its contributors'' in the
.\" documentation or other materials provided with the distribution and in
.\" all advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software.
.\" Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors may
.\" be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\" specific prior written permission.
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'' AND WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.\"
.\"	@(#)ddn.4	6.4 (Berkeley) 6/23/90
.\"
.TH DDN 4 "June 23, 1990"
.UC 6
.SH NAME
ddn \- DDN Standard Mode X.25 IMP interface
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B "device ddn0 at uba0 csr 166740 vector ddnintr"
.SH DESCRIPTION
The 
.I ddn
device provides a DDN Standard Mode X.25 interface to an IMP using
the ACC ACP625 X.25 board.  It is normally used for connecting to
the Defense Data Network (DDN).  The controller itself is not accessible
to users, but instead provides a network interface for the
Internet Protocol described in
.IR ip (4).
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.BR "ddn%d: not alive" .
The initialization routine was entered even though the device
did not autoconfigure.  This indicates a system problem.
.PP
.BR "ddn%d: failed getting UBA resources for lcn %d" .
Insufficient UNIBUS resources existed to initialize the device.
This is likely to be a shortage of UNIBUS mapping registers.
.PP
.BR "ddn%d: couldn't get X25 init buffer" .
This indicates that an 
.I mbuf
could not be allocated for sending the initialization message to the
ACP625.
.PP
.BR "DDN: illegal X25 address length!"
.br
.BR "DDN: illegal X25 address format!"
.br
These errors indicate a problem with the called X.25 address received
from the IMP on an incoming call.
.PP
.BR "X25 RESET on lcn = %d" .
This indicates that an unexpected X.25 RESET was received on the
indicated LCN.
.PP
.BR "X25 INTERRUPT on lcn = %d, code = %d" .
This indicates that an unexpected X.25 INTERRUPT Packet was received on the
indicated LCN.
.PP
.BR "ddn%d: failed to get supr msg bfr!" .
This indicates that an 
.I mbuf
could not be allocated for sending a supervisor message to the
ACP625.
.PP
Any other error message from ddn%d: indicates a serious error
detected by either the driver or the ACP625 firmware.
.SH SEE ALSO
netintro(4), ip(4)
