.\" Copyright (c) 1986 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms are permitted provided
.\" that: (1) source distributions retain this entire copyright notice and
.\" comment, and (2) distributions including binaries display the following
.\" acknowledgement:  ``This product includes software developed by the
.\" University of California, Berkeley and its contributors'' in the
.\" documentation or other materials provided with the distribution and in
.\" all advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software.
.\" Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors may
.\" be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\" specific prior written permission.
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'' AND WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.\"
.\"	@(#)de.4	6.4 (Berkeley) 6/23/90
.\"
.TH DE 4 "June 23, 1990"
.UC 5
.SH NAME
de \- DEC DEUNA 10 Mb/s Ethernet interface
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B "device de0 at uba0 csr 174510 vector deintr"
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I de
interface provides access to a 10 Mb/s Ethernet network through
a Digital Equipment UNIBUS Network Adapter (DEUNA).
.PP
Each of the host's network addresses
is specified at boot time with an SIOCSIFADDR
ioctl.  The
.I de
interface employs the address resolution protocol described in
.IR arp (4)
to dynamically map between Internet and Ethernet addresses on the local
network.
.PP
The interface normally tries to use a ``trailer'' encapsulation
to minimize copying data on input and output.
The use of trailers is negotiated with ARP.
This negotiation may be disabled, on a per-interface basis,
by setting the IFF_NOTRAILERS
flag with an SIOCSIFFLAGS ioctl.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
\fBde%d: hardware address %s\fP.
This is a normal autoconfiguration message noting the 6 byte physical
ethernet address of the adapter.
.PP
\fBde%d: oerror, flags=%b tdrerr=%b (len=%d)\fP.
The hardware indicated an error
in transmitting a packet to the cable.
The status and error flags are reported.
.PP
\fBde%d: ierror, flags=%b lenerr=%b (len=%d)\fP.
The hardware indicated an error
in reading a packet from the cable.
The status and error flags are reported.
.PP
\fBde%d: can't handle af%d\fP.  The interface was handed
a message with addresses formatted in an unsuitable address
family; the packet was dropped.
.PP
\fBde%d: buffer unavailable\fP.  The interface received more packets
than it had buffers allocated to receive them.
.PP
\fBde%d: address change failed, csr0=%b csr1=%b\fP.
The interface was unable to reprogram
its physical ethernet address.
This may happen with very early models of the interface.
This facility is used only when
the controller is not the first network interface configured for XNS.
.PP
The following messages indicate a probable hardware error performing
the indicated operation during autoconfiguration or initialization.
The two control and status registers
should indicate the nature of the failure.
See the hardware manual for details.
.PP
\fBde%d: reset failed, csr0=%b csr1=%b\fP.
.PP
\fBde%d: ppcb failed, csr0=%b csr1=%b\fP.
.PP
\fBde%d: read addr failed, csr0=%b csr1=%b\fP.
.PP
\fBde%d: wtring failed, csr0=%b csr1=%b\fP.
.PP
\fBde%d: wtmode failed, csr0=%b csr1=%b\fP.
.SH SEE ALSO
netintro(4), inet(4), arp(4)
