.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)hy.4	8.1 (Berkeley) 6/5/93
.\"
.Dd June 5, 1993
.Dt HY 4 vax
.Os BSD 4.2
.Sh NAME
.Nm hy
.Nd Network Systems Hyperchannel interface
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device hy0 at uba0 csr 0172410 vector hyint"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm hy
interface provides access to a Network
Systems Corporation Hyperchannel Adapter.
.Pp
The network to which the interface is attached
is specified at boot time with an
.Dv SIOCSIFADDR
.Xr ioctl 2 .  
The host's address is discovered by reading the adapter status
register.  The interface will not transmit or receive
packets until the network number is known.
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "hy%d: unit number 0x%x port %d type %x microcode level 0x%x."
Identifies the device during autoconfiguration.
.Pp
.It hy%d: can't handle af%d.
The interface was handed
a message with addresses formatted in an unsuitable address
family; the packet was dropped.
.Pp
.It hy%d: can't initialize.
The interface was unable to allocate
.Tn UNIBUS
resources. This
is usually due to having too many network devices on an 11/750
where there are only 3 buffered data paths.
.Pp
.It hy%d: NEX - Non Existent Memory.
Non existent memory error returned from hardware.
.Pp
.It hy%d:  BAR overflow.
Bus address register
overflow error returned from hardware.
.Pp
.It hy%d: Power Off bit set, trying to reset.
Adapter has lost power, driver will reset the bit
and see if power is still out in the adapter.
.Pp
.It hy%d: Power Off Error, network shutdown.
Power was really off in the adapter, network
connections are dropped.
Software does not shut down the network unless
power has been off for a while.
.Pp
.It hy%d: RECVD MP > MPSIZE (%d).
A message proper was received that is too big.
Probable a driver bug.
Shouldn't happen.
.Pp
.It "hy%d: xmit error \- len > hy_olen [%d > %d]."
Probable driver error.
Shouldn't happen.
.Pp
.It hy%d: DRIVER BUG \- INVALID STATE %d.
The driver state machine reached a non-existent state.
Definite driver bug.
.Pp
.It hy%d: watchdog timer expired.
A command in the adapter has taken too long to complete.
Driver will abort and retry the command.
.Pp
.It hy%d: adapter power restored.
Software was able to reset the power off bit,
indicating that the power has been restored.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr inet 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
interface appeared in
.Bx 4.2 .
.Sh BUGS
If the adapter does not respond to the status command
issued during autoconfigure, the adapter is assumed down.
A reboot is required to recognize it.
.Pp
The adapter power fail interrupt seems to occur
sporadically when power has, in fact, not failed.
The driver will believe that power has failed
only if it can not reset the power fail latch after
a
.Dq reasonable
time interval.
These seem to appear about 2-4 times a day on some machines.
There seems to be no correlation with adapter
rev level, number of ports used etc. and whether a
machine will get these
.Dq bogus powerfails .
They don't seem to cause any real problems so they have
been ignored.
