.\" $Revision: 1.3 $
.TH EXPIREOVER 8
.SH NAME
expireover \- Expire entries from the news overview database
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B expireover
[
.B \-a
]
[
.BI \-D " overviewdir"
]
[
.BI \-f " file"
]
[
.B \-n
]
[
.BI \-O " overview.fmt"
]
[
.B \-s
]
[
.B \-v
]
[
.B \-z
]
[
.I file...
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Expireover
expires entries from the news overview database.
It reads a list of pathnames (relative to the spool directory,
.\" =()<.IR @<_PATH_SPOOL>@ ),>()=
.IR /var/spool/news/spool ),
from the specified
.I files
or standard input if none are specified.
(A file name of ``\-'' may be used to specify the standard input.)
It then removes any mention of those articles from the appropriate overview
database.
If the ``\-z'' flag is used, then the input is assumed to be sorted such
that all entries for a newsgroup appear together so that it can be purged
at once.
This flag can be useful when used with the sorted output of
.IR expire (8)'s
\&``\-z'' flag.
.PP
If the ``\-s'' flag is used, then
.I expireover
will read the spool directory for all groups mentioned in the
.IR active (5)
file, and remove the overview entries for any articles that do not appear.
To specify an alternate file, use the ``\-f'' flag; a name of ``\-'' is
taken to mean the standard input.
.PP
The ``\-a'' flag reads the spool directory and adds any missing
overview entries.
It will create files if necessary.
This can be used to initialize a database, or to sync up a overview
database that may be lacking articles due to a crash.
.I Overchan
should be running, to ensure that any incoming articles get included.
Using this flag implies the ``\-s'' flag; the ``\-f'' flag may be used
to add only a subset of the newsgroups.
.PP
To see a list of the entries that would be added or deleted, use the ``\-v''
flag.
To perform no real updates, use the ``\-n'' flag.
.PP
The ``\-D'' flag can be used to specify where the databases are stored.
The default directory is
.\" =()<.IR @<_PATH_OVERVIEWDIR>@ .>()=
.IR /var/spool/news/spool .
.PP
The ``\-O'' flag may be used to specify an alternate location for the
.IR overview.fmt (5)
file; this is normally only useful for debugging.
.SH HISTORY
Written by Rob Robertson <rob@violet.berkeley.edu>
and Rich $alz <rsalz@uunet.uu.net>
(with help from Dave Laurence <tale@uunet.uu.net>)
for InterNetNews.
.de R$
This is revision \\$3, dated \\$4.
..
.R$ $Id: expireover.8,v 1.3 1993/03/18 21:03:36 rsalz Exp $
.SH "SEE ALSO"
expire(8),
overview.fmt(5).
