.TH NEWSLOG 8
.SH NAME
newslog \- maintenance of Usenet log files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B scanlogs
[
.B norotate
]
[
.B nonn
]

.B writelog
.B name
.B text...

.B innstat

.B tally.unwanted

.B tally.control

.B innlog.awk

.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Scanlogs
summarizes the information recorded in the INN log files (see
.IR newslog (5)).
By default, it also rotates and cleans out the logs.
It is normally invoked by the
.IR news.daily (8)
script.
.PP
The following keywords are accepted:
.TP
.I norotate
Using this keyword disables the rotating and cleaning aspect of the log
processing: the logs files are only scanned for information and no contents
are altered.
.TP
.I nonn
Normally the
.I nn
log file is scanned and rotated.
Using this keyword disables this function.
.PP
If
.I scanlogs
is invoked more than once a day, the ``norotate'' keyword should be used
to prevent premature log cleaning.
.PP
The
.I writelog
script is used to write a log entry or send it as mail.
The
.I name
parameter specifies the name of the log file where the entry should
be written.
If it is the word ``mail'' then the entry is mailed to the news administrator,
.\" =()<@<NEWSMASTER>@.>()=
usenet .
The data that is written or sent consists of the
.I text
given on the command line, followed by standard input indented by
four spaces.
.IR Shlock (1)
is used to avoid simultaneous updates to a single log file.
.PP
The
.I innstat
script prints a snapshot of the INN system.
It displays the operating mode of the server,
as well as disk usage and the status of all log and lock files.
.PP
The rest of the scripts described here are normally invoked by
.IR scanlogs .
They parse log files that are described in
.IR newslog (5),
and the server's article log file described in
.IR innd (8).
.PP
.I Tally.unwanted
script parses the article log file to update the cumulative list of
articles posted to unwanted newsgroups,
.IR unwanted.log .
.PP
.I Tally.control
reads its standard input, which should be the
.I newgroup.log
and
.I rmgroup.log
log files.
It updates the cumulative list of newsgroup creations and deletions,
.IR control.log .
.PP
.I Innlog.awk
is an
.IR awk (1)
script that summarizes the activity that
.I innd
and
.IR nnrpd (8)
report to syslog.
.SH HISTORY
Written by Landon Curt Noll <chongo@toad.com> and Rich $alz
<rsalz@uunet.uu.net> for InterNetNews.
.de R$
This is revision \\$3, dated \\$4.
..
.R$ $Id: newslog.8,v 1.2 1992/08/04 19:12:39 rsalz Exp $
.SH "SEE ALSO"
innd(8)
newslog(5),
news.daily(8),
nnrpd(8).
