.\" $Revision: 1.9 $
.TH NNRP.ACCESS 5
.SH NAME
nnrp.access \- access file for on-campus NNTP sites
.SH DESCRIPTION
The file
.\" =()<.I @<_PATH_NNRPACCESS>@>()=
.I /var/spool/news/data/nnrp.access
specifies the access control for those NNTP sites that are not
handled by the main InterNetNews daemon
.IR innd (8).
The
.IR nnrpd (8)
server reads it when first spawned by
.IR innd .
.PP
Comments begin with a number sign (``#'') and continue through the end
of the line.
Blank lines and comments are ignored.
All other lines should consist of five fields separated by colons:
.RS
.nf
hosts:perms:username:password:patterns
.fi
.RE
.PP
The first field is a
.IR wildmat (3)-style
pattern specifying the names or Internet address of a set of
.IR hosts .
Before a match is checked, the client's hostname (or its Internet
address if
.IR gethostbyaddr (3)
fails)
is converted to lowercase.
Each line is matched in turn, and the last successful match is taken
as the correct one.
.PP
The second field is a set of letters specifying the permissions granted
to the client.
The
.I perms
should be chosen from the following set:
.RS
.nf
R	The client can retrieve articles
P	The client can post articles
.fi
.RE
.PP
The third and fourth fields specify the
.I username
and
.I password
that the client must use to authenticate themselves before the server
will accept any articles.
Note that no authentication (other then a matching entry in this file)
is required for newsreading.
If they are empty, then no password is required.
Whitespace in these fields will result in the client being unable
to properly authenticate themselves and may be used to disable access.
.PP
The fifth field is a set of patterns identifying the newsgroups that
the client is allowed to access.
The patterns are interpreted in the same manner as the
.IR newsfeeds (5)
file.
The default, however, denies access to all groups.
.PP
The access file is normally used to provide host-level access control
for reading and posting articles.
There are times, however, when this is not sufficient and user-level access
control is needed.
Whenever an NNTP ``authinfo'' command is used, the 
.I nnrpd
server re-reads this file and looks for a matching username and password.
If the local newsreaders are modified to send the ``authinfo'' command,
then all host entries can have no access and specific users can be granted
the appropriate read and post access.
.PP
For example:
.RS
.nf
##  host:perm:user:pass:groups
## Default is no access.
*::  -no-  :  -no-  :!*
##  FOO hosts have no password, can read anything.
*.foo.com:Read Post:::*
##  A related workstation can't access FOO newsgroups.
lenox.foo.net:RP:martha:hiatt:*,!foo.*
.fi
.RE
.PP
If the file contains passwords, it should not be world-readable.
.SH HISTORY
Written by Rich $alz <rsalz@uunet.uu.net> for InterNetNews.
.de R$
This is revision \\$3, dated \\$4.
..
.R$ $Id: nnrp.access.5,v 1.9 1992/08/19 16:33:51 rsalz Exp $
.SH "SEE ALSO"
innd(8),
newsfeeds(5),
nnrpd(8),
wildmat(3).
