.TH NNTPSEND 8
.SH NAME
nntpsend \- send Usenet articles to remote site
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nntpsend
[
.B \-d
]
[
.B \-p
]
[
.B \-r
]
[
.B \-S
]
[
.BI \-s " size"
]
[
.BI \-t " timeout"
]
[
.BI \-T " timelimit"
]
[
.I sitename
.I fqdn
] ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Nntpsend
is a front-end that invokes
.IR innxmit (1)
to send Usenet articles to a remote NNTP site.
.PP
The sites to be fed may be specified by giving
.I sitename
.I fqdn
pairs on the command line.
If no such pairs are given,
.I nntpsend
defaults to the information given in the
.IR nntpsend.ctl (5)
config file.
.PP
The
.I sitename
should be the name of the site as specified in the
.IR newsfeeds (5) 
file.
The 
.I fqdn 
should be the hostname or IP address of the remote site.
.PP
An
.I innxmit
is launched for sites with queued news.
All
.I innxmit
processes are spawned in the background and the script waits for
them all to finish before returning.
Output is sent to the file
.\" =()<.IR @<_PATH_MOST_LOGS>@/nntpsend.log .>()=
.IR /var/spool/news/data/nntpsend.log .
In order to keep from overwhelming the local system, 
.I nntpsend
waits five seconds before spawned each child.
The flag ``\-a'' is always given as a flag to
.IR innxmit .
.PP
.I Nntpsend
expects that the batchfile for a site is named
.\" =()<.IR @<_PATH_BATCHDIR>@/sitename .>()=
.IR /var/spool/news/out.going/sitename .
To prevent batchfile corruption,
.IR shlock (1)
is used to ``lock'' these files.
.PP
The ``\-p'', ``\-r'', ``\-S'', ``-t'', and ``-T'' flags are passed on to
the child
.I innxmit
program.
Note that if the ``\-p'' flag is used then no connection is made and
no articles are fed to the remote site.
It is useful to have
.IR cron (8)
invoke
.I nntpsend
with this flag in case a site cannot be reached for an extended period of time.
.PP
If the ``\-s'' flag is used, then
.IR shrinkfile (1)
will be invoked to perform a tail truncation on the batchfile and the flag
will be passed to it.
.PP
When
.I sitename
.I fqdn
pairs are given on the command line, 
any flags given on the command completely describe how
.I innxmit
and
.I shrinkfile
operate.
When no such pairs are given on the command line, then
the information found in
.I nntpsend.ctl
becomes the default flags for that site.
Any flags given on the command line override the default flags
for the site.
.PP
For example, with the following control file:
.RS
.nf
nsavax:erehwon.nsavax.gov::-S -t60
group70:group70.org::
walldrug:walldrug.com:1m:-T1800 -t300
.fi
.RE
.PP
The command:
.RS
nntpsend
.RE
will result in the following:
.RS
.nf
.ta \w'sitename   'u +\w'truncation   'u
Sitename	Truncation	Innxmit flags
nsavax	(none)	\-a \-S \-t60
group70	(none)	\-a \-t180
walldrug	1m	\-a \-T1800 \-t300
.fi
.RE
.PP
The command:
.RS
nntpsend \-d \-T1200
.RE
will result in the following:
.RS
.nf
.ta \w'sitename   'u +\w'truncation   'u
Sitename	Truncation	Innxmit flags
nsavax	(none)	\-a \-d \-S \-T1200 \-t60
group70	(none)	\-a \-d \-T1200 \-t180
walldrug	1m	\-a \-d \-T1200 \-t300
.fi
.RE
.PP
The command:
.RS
nntpsend \-s 5m \-T1200 nsavax erehwon.nsavax.gov group70 group70.org
.RE
will result in the following:
.RS
.nf
.ta \w'sitename   'u +\w'truncation   'u
Sitename	Truncation	Innxmit flags
nsavax	5m	\-a \-T1200 \-t180
group70	5m	\-a \-T1200 \-t180
.fi
.RE
.PP
Remember that ``\-a'' is always given, and ``\-t'' defaults to 180.
.SH HISTORY
Written by Landon Curt Noll <chongo@toad.com>
and Rich $alz <rsalz@uunet.uu.net> for InterNetNews.
.de R$
This is revision \\$3, dated \\$4.
..
.R$ $Id: nntpsend.8,v 1.3 1992/08/14 20:37:08 rsalz Exp $
.SH "SEE ALSO"
innxmit(1), 
newsfeeds(5),
nntpsend.ctl(5),
shrinkfile(1).
