.\" Copyright (c) 1983 Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.  The Berkeley software License Agreement
.\" specifies the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.\"
.\"	@(#)mailaddr.7	6.2 (Berkeley) %G%
.\"
.TH MAILADDR 7 ""
.UC 5
.SH NAME
mailaddr \- mail addressing description
.SH DESCRIPTION
Mail addresses are based on the ARPANET protocol
listed at the end of this manual page.
These addresses are in the general format
.PP
		user@domain
.PP
where a domain is a hierarchical dot separated list of subdomains.
For example,
the address
.PP
		eric@monet.Berkeley.ARPA
.PP
is normally interpreted from right to left:
the message should go to the ARPA name tables
(which do not correspond exactly to the physical ARPANET),
then to the Berkeley gateway,
after which it should go to the local host monet.
When the message reaches monet it is delivered to the user ``eric''.
.PP
Unlike some other forms of addressing,
this does not imply any routing.
Thus,
although this address is specified as an ARPA address,
it might travel by an alternate route
if that was more convenient or efficient.
For example,
at Berkeley the associated message
would probably go directly to monet over the Ethernet
rather than going via the Berkeley ARPANET gateway.
.SS Abbreviation.
.PP
Under certain circumstances
it may not be necessary to type the entire domain name.
In general anything following the first dot
may be omitted
if it is the same as the domain from which you are sending the message.
For example,
a user on
``calder.Berkeley.ARPA''
could send to
``eric@monet''
without adding the
``.Berkeley.ARPA''
since it is the same on both sending and receiving hosts.
.PP
Certain other abbreviations may be permitted
as special cases.
For example,
at Berkeley ARPANET hosts can be referenced
without adding the
``.ARPA''
as long as their names do not conflict
with a local host name.
.SS Compatibility.
.PP
Certain old address formats
are converted to the new format
to provide compatibility with the previous mail system.
In particular,
.PP
		host:user
.PP
is converted to
.PP
		user@host
.PP
to be consistent with the
.IR rcp (1C)
command.
.PP
Also, the syntax:
.PP
		host!user
.PP
is converted to:
.PP
		user@host.UUCP
.PP
This is normally converted back to the
``host!user''
form
before being sent on for compatibility with older UUCP hosts.
.PP
The current implementation is not able to route messages
automatically through the UUCP network.
Until that time you must explicitly tell the mail system
which hosts to send your message through
to get to your final destination.
.SS Case Distinctions.
.PP
Domain names (i.e., anything after the ``@'' sign)
may be given in any mixture of upper and lower case
with the exception of UUCP hostnames.
Most hosts accept any mixture of case in user names,
with the notable exception of MULTICS sites.
.SS Differences with ARPA Protocols.
.PP
Although the UNIX addressing scheme
is based on the ARPA mail addressing protocols,
there are some significant differences.
.PP
At the time of this writing
DARPA is converting to real domains.
The following rules may be useful:
.PP
\(bu The syntax
``user@host.ARPA''
is being split up into
``user@host.COM'',
``user@host.GOV'',
and
``user@host.EDU''
for commercial, government, and educational institutions respectively.
.PP
\(bu The syntax
``user@host''
(with no dots)
has traditionally referred to the ARPANET.
In the future this semantic will not be continued \(em
instead, the host will be assumed to be in your organization.
You should start using one of the syntaxes above.
.PP
\(bu Host names of the form ``ORG-NAME''
(e.g., MIT-MC or CMU-CS-A)
will be changing to ``NAME.ORG.XXX''
(where `XXX' is COM, GOV, or EDU).
For example,
MIT-MC will change to MC.MIT.EDU.
In some cases names will be split apart even if they do not have dashes.
For example,
USC-ISIF will probably change to F.ISI.USC.EDU.
.SS Route-addrs.
.PP
Under some circumstances
it may be necessary to route a message
through several hosts
to get it to the final destination.
Normally this routing is done automatically,
but sometimes it is desirable to route the message manually.
An address that shows these relays are termed
``route-addrs.''
These use the syntax:
.PP
		<@hosta,@hostb:user@hostc>
.PP
This specifies that the message should be sent to hosta,
from there to hostb,
and finally to hostc.
This path is forced
even if there is a more efficient path
to hostc.
.PP
Route-addrs
occur frequently on return addresses,
since these are generally augmented by the software
at each host.
It is generally possible to ignore all but the
``user@host''
part of the address to determine the actual sender.
.SS Postmaster.
.PP
Every site is required to have a user or user alias
designated
``postmaster''
to which problems with the mail system may be addressed.
.SS Other Networks.
.PP
Some other networks can be reached
by giving the name of the network as the last component
of the domain.
.I "This is not a standard feature"
and may not be supported at all sites.
For example,
messages to CSNET or BITNET sites can often be sent to
``user@host.CSNET''
or
``user@host.BITNET''
respectively.
.SH BERKELEY
The following comments apply only to the Berkeley environment.
.SS What's My Address?
.PP
If you are on a local machine,
say monet,
your address is
.PP
		yourname@monet.Berkeley.ARPA
.PP
However, since most of the world does not have the new software
in place yet,
you will have to give correspondents slightly different addresses.
From the ARPANET,
your address would be:
.PP
		yourname%monet@Berkeley.ARPA
.PP
From UUCP, your address would be:
.PP
		ucbvax!yourname%monet
.PP
.SS Computer Center.
.PP
The Berkeley Computer Center
is in a subdomain of Berkeley.
Messages to the computer center
should be addressed to:
.PP
		user%host.CC@Berkeley.ARPA
.PP
The alternate syntax:
.PP
		user@host.CC
.PP
may be used if the message is sent from inside Berkeley.
.PP
For the time being
Computer Center hosts
are known within the Berkeley domain,
i.e.,
the
``.CC''
is optional.
However,
it is likely that this situation will change
with time as both the Computer Science department
and the Computer Center grow.
.SH BUGS
The RFC822 group syntax
(``group:user1,user2,user3;'')
is not supported except in the special case of
``group:;''
because of a conflict with old berknet-style addresses.
.PP
Route-Address syntax is grotty.
.PP
UUCP- and ARPANET-style addresses do not coexist politely.
.SH SEE ALSO
mail(1), sendmail(8);
Crocker, D. H.,
.ul
Standard for the Format of Arpa Internet Text Messages,
RFC822.
