.so tmac.ilib
.TH LABELS 1 "The University of Arizona \- 6/28/83"
.SH NAME
labels \- format labels
.SH SYNOPSIS
\f3labels\fP [options]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fILabels\fP writes labels onto the standard output using
coded information taken from standard input.  In the input, a line
beginning with \f3#\fR is a label header.  Subsequent lines up to the
next header or end-of-file are accumulated and output so as to be
centered horizontally and vertically on pin-feed
label forms.  Lines beginning with \f3*\fR are treated as comments
and are ignored.
.PP
The following options may appear in any order:
.IP \fI\-n\fP 0.75i
Print \fIn\fP copies of each label.
.IP "\f3\-s\fP\0\fIstring\fP"
Select only those labels whose headers contain a character
in \fIstring\fP.
.IP \f3\-t\fP
Format for curved tape labels (the default is to format
for rectangular mailing labels).
.PP
Label forms should be used with a pin-feed platen.  For mailing labels,
the carriage
should be adjusted so that the first character is printed at the
leftmost position on the label and so that the first line of the
output is printed on the topmost line of the label.
Since tape labels are curved, some experimentation may be required
to get the text positioned properly.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Label lines may be at most 40 characters long and there may be
at most eight lines per label.  If these limits are exceeded, a label
with an error message is formatted onto standard error output.
Thus if standard output and standard error output are directed to
the same file, an erroneous label does not result in misformatting
of the other labels.
.SH AUTHOR
Ralph E. Griswold
