.\" Copyright (c) 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" %sccs.include.redist.man%
.\"
.\"	@(#)MAKEDEV.8	8.1 (Berkeley) %G%
.\"
.TH MAKEDEV 8 ""
.UC 7
.SH NAME
MAKEDEV \- create system and device special files
.SH SYNOPSIS
MAKEDEV name ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
The shell script
.IR MAKEDEV ,
found in the ``/dev'' directory, is used to create the common special
files.
See
.IR special (8)
for a more complete discussion of special files.
.PP
.I MAKEDEV
takes any number of device names as arguments, where the names are
the common abbreviation for the device.
There are two special devices, ``std'' and ``local''.
The former creates the standard devices for the architecture.
The latter is for devices specific to the local site, and
executes the shell file ``MAKEDEV.local''.
.PP
The Tahoe supports the following devices.
Where a device name is followed by a hash sign (``#''), the hash sign
must be replaced by a unit number.
.TP 10
std
the standard devices (CP, console, drum, fd/*, klog, kmem, mem, null,
remote, stderr, stdin, stdout, tty, vmem)
.br
.ns
.TP 10
local
configuration specific devices
.br
.ns
.TP 10
cy#
Cipher
.br
.ns
.TP 10
dk#
VDDC or SMDE disk on Versabus
.br
.ns
.TP 10
dr#
IKON DR-11W
.br
.ns
.TP 10
enp#
CMC Ethernet interface for loading RAM
.br
.ns
.TP 10
hd#
VDDC or SMDE disk on VME
.br
.ns
.TP 10
ik#
IKON DR-11W w/ E&S PS300
.br
.ns
.TP 10
mp#
MPCC
.br
.ns
.TP 10
pty#
set of 32 master and slave pseudo terminals
.br
.ns
.TP 10
vx#
VIOC
.SH FILES
/dev		The special file directory.
.SH SEE ALSO
.IR mknod (1), 
.IR intro (4),
.IR config (8),
.IR special (8)
