.TH DATE 1L \" -*- nroff -*-
.SH NAME
date \- print or set the system date and time
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B date
[\-u] [\-s new-date] [+FORMAT] [MMDDhhmm[[CC]YY][.ss]]
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page
documents the GNU version of
.BR date .
.B date
with no arguments prints the current time and date (in the format
of the `%c' directive described below).
If given an argument that starts with a `+', it prints the current
time and date in a format controlled by that argument, which has the
same format as the format string passed to the `strftime' function.
Except for directives that start with `%', characters in that string
are printed unchanged.
.PP
The directives are:
.IP %
a literal %
.IP n
a newline
.IP t
a horizontal tab
.PP
Time fields:
.IP %H
hour (00..23)
.IP %I
hour (00..12)
.IP %M
minute (00..59)
.IP %p
locale's AM or PM
.IP %r
time, 12-hour (hh:mm:ss [AP]M)
.IP %S
second (00..61)
.IP %T
time, 24-hour (hh:mm:ss)
.IP %X
locale's time representation (%H:%M:%S)
.IP %Z
time zone (e.g., EDT), or nothing if no time zone is determinable
.PP
Date fields:
.IP %a
locale's abbreviated weekday name (Sun..Sat)
.IP %A
locale's full weekday name, variable length (Sunday..Saturday)
.IP %b
locale's abbreviated month name (Jan..Dec)
.IP %B
locale's full month name, variable length (January..December)
.IP %c
locale's date and time (Sat Nov 04 12:02:33 EST 1989)
.IP %d
day of month (01..31)
.IP %D
date (mm/dd/yy)
.IP %h
same as %b
.IP %j
day of year (001..366)
.IP %m
month (01..12)
.IP %U
week number of year with Sunday as first day of week (00..53)
.IP %w
day of week (0..6)
.IP %W
week number of year with Monday as first day of week (00..53)
.IP %x
locale's date representation (mm/dd/yy)
.IP %y
last two digits of year (00..99)
.IP %Y
year (1970...)
.PP
If given an argument that does not start with `+',
.B date
sets the system clock to the time and date specified by that argument.
The argument must consist entirely of digits, which have the following
meaning:
.IP MM
month
.IP DD
day within month
.IP hh
hour
.IP mm
minute
.IP CC
first two digits of year (optional)
.IP YY
last two digits of year (optional)
.IP ss
second (optional)
.PP
Only the superuser can set the system clock.
.SS OPTIONS
.TP
.I "\-s new-date"
Set the time and date to
.IR new-date ,
which can be in almost any common format.
It can contain month names, timezones, `am' and `pm', etc.
.TP
.I \-u
Print or set the time and date in Universal Coordinated Time (also
known as Greenwich Mean Time) instead of in local (wall clock) time.
