.TH TEST 1L \" -*- nroff -*-
.SH NAME
test \- check file types and compare values
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B test
[expr]
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page
documents the GNU version of
.BR test .
.PP
.B test
returns a status of 0 (true) or 1 (false) depending on
the evaluation of
the conditional expression
.IR expr .
Expressions may be unary or binary.  Unary
expressions are often used to examine the status of a file.  There
are string operators
and numeric comparison operators as well.

.PD 0
.TP
.B \-b \fIfile\fP
True if \fIfile\fP exists and is block special.
.TP
.B \-c \fIfile\fP
True if \fIfile\fP exists and is character special.
.TP
.B \-d \fIfile\fP
True if \fIfile\fP exists and is a directory.
.TP
.B \-e \fIfile\fP
True if \fIfile\fP exists
.TP
.B \-f \fIfile\fP
True if \fIfile\fP exists and is a regular file.
.TP
.B \-g \fIfile\fP
True if \fIfile\fP exists and is set-group-id.
.TP
.B \-k \fIfile\fP
True if \fIfile\fP has its ``sticky'' bit set.
.TP
.B \-L \fIfile\fP
True if \fIfile\fP exists and is a symbolic link.
.TP
.B \-p \fIfile\fP
True if \fIfile\fP exists and is a named pipe.
.TP
.B \-r \fIfile\fP
True if \fIfile\fP exists and is readable.
.TP
.B \-s \fIfile\fP
True if \fIfile\fP exists and has a size greater than zero.
.TP
.B \-S \fIfile\fP
True if \fIfile\fP exists and is a socket.
.TP
.B \-t [\fIfd\fP]
True if
.I fd
is opened on a terminal.  If
.I fd
is omitted, it defaults to 1 (standard output).
.TP
.B \-u \fIfile\fP
True if \fIfile\fP exists and its set-user-id bit is set.
.TP
.B \-w \fIfile\fP
True if \fIfile\fP exists and is writable.
.TP
.B \-x \fIfile\fP
True if \fIfile\fP exists and is executable.
.TP
.B \-O \fIfile\fP
True if \fIfile\fP exists and is owned by the effective user id.
.TP
.B \-G \fIfile\fP
True if \fIfile\fP exists and is owned by the effective group id.
.TP
\fIfile1\fP \-\fBnt\fP \fIfile2\fP
True if \fIfile1\fP is newer (according to
modification date) than \fIfile2\fP.
.TP
\fIfile1\fP \-\fBot\fP \fIfile2\fP
True if \fIfile1\fP is older than file2.
.TP
\fIfile1\fP \fB\-ef\fP \fIfile\fP
True if \fIfile1\fP and \fIfile2\fP have the same device and
inode numbers.
.TP
.B \-z \fIstring\fP
True if the length of \fIstring\fP is zero.
.TP
.B \-n \fIstring\fP
.TP
\fIstring\fP
True if the length of
.I string
is non-zero.
.TP
\fIstring1\fP \fB=\fP \fIstring2\fP
True if the strings are equal.
.TP
\fIstring1\fP \fB!=\fP \fIstring2\fP
True if the strings are not equal.
.TP
.B ! \fIexpr\fP
True if
.I expr
is false.
.TP
\fIexpr1\fP \-\fBa\fP \fIexpr2\fP
True if both
.I expr1
and
.I expr2
are true.
.TP
\fIexpr1\fP \-\fBo\fP \fIexpr2\fP
True if either
.I expr1
or
.I expr2
is true.
.TP
.I arg1 \fBOP\fP arg2
.SM
.B OP
is one of
.BR \-eq ,
.BR \-ne ,
.BR \-lt ,
.BR \-le ,
.BR \-gt ,
or
.BR \-ge .
These arithmetic binary operators return true if \fIarg1\fP
is equal, not-equal, less-than, less-than-or-equal,
greater-than, or greater-than-or-equal than \fIarg2\fP,
respectively.
.I arg1
and
.I arg2
may be positive integers, negative integers, or the special
expression \fB\-l\fP \fIstring\fP, which evaluates to the
length of 
.IR string .
