.TH TS 4 5/10/81
.UC 4
.SH NAME
ts \- TS-11 magtape interface
.SH SYNOPSIS
controller zs0 at uba? csr 0172520 vector tsintr
.br
tape ts0 at zs0 drive 0
.SH DESCRIPTION
The ts-11 combination provides a standard tape drive
interface as described in
.IR mt (4).
The ts-11 operates only at 1600 bpi, and only one transport
is possible per controller.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
mt(1), tar(1), tp(1), ht(4), mt(4), tm(4), ut(4)
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
\fBts%d: no write ring\fR.  An attempt was made to write on the tape drive
when no write ring was present; this message is written on the terminal of
the user who tried to access the tape.
.PP
\fBts%d: not online\fR.  An attempt was made to access the tape while it
was offline; this message is written on the terminal of the user
who tried to access the tape.
.PP
\fBts%d: hard error bn%d xs0=%b\fR.  A hard error occurred on the tape
at block \fIbn\fR; status register 0 is printed in octal and symbolically
decoded as bits.
.SH BUGS
If any non-data error is encountered on non-raw tape, it refuses to do anything
more until closed.
.PP
The device lives at the same address as a tm-11
.IR tm (4);
as it is very difficult to get this device to interrupt, a generic
system assumes that a ts is present whenever no tm-11 exists but
the csr responds and a ts-11 is configured.
This does no harm as long as a non-existant ts-11 is not accessed.
.PP
The system should remember which controlling terminal has the tape drive
open and write error messages to that terminal rather than on the console.
