.TH PRINTCAP 5 "25 February 1983"
.UC 4
.ad
.SH NAME
printcap \- printer capability data base
.SH SYNOPSIS
/etc/printcap
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I printcap
is a simplified version of the
.IR termcap (5)
data base
used to describe line printers.  The spooling system accesses the
.I printcap
file every time it is used, allowing dynamic
addition and deletion of printers.  Each entry in the data base
is used to describe one printer.  This data base may not be
substituted for, as is possible for 
.IR termcap ,
because it may allow accounting to be bypassed.
.PP
The default printer is normally 
.IR lp ,
though the environment variable
.I PRINTER
may be used to override this.  Each spooling utility supports an option,
.BI \-P printer,
to allow explicit naming of a destination printer.
.SH CAPABILITIES
Refer to
.I termcap
for a description of the file layout.
.nf

.ta \w'k0-k9  'u +\w'Type  'u +\w'``/usr/spool/lpd"  'u
\fBName	Type	Default	Description\fR
sd	str	``/usr/spool/lpd"	spool directory
lo	str	``lock"	name of lock file
st	str	``status"	status file name
dn	str	``/usr/lib/lpd"	spooling daemon's path name
lf	str	``/dev/console"	error logging file name
lp	str	``/dev/lp"	device name to open for output
br	num	none	if lp is a tty, set the baud rate (ioctl call)
fc	num	0	if lp is a tty, clear flag bits (sgtty.h)
fs	num	0	like `fc' but set bits
rm	str	NULL	machine name for remote printer
rl	str	``/usr/lib/rlpr"	remote lpr started by local daemon
bd	str	``/usr/ucb"	bin directory of lpr, lpq, lprm
rp	str	NULL	remote printer name argument (lp by default)
mx	num	1000	maximum file size (in BUFSIZ blocks)
of	str	NULL	name of output filtering program
af	str	NULL	name of accounting file
ff	str	``\ef"	string to send for a form feed
tr	str	NULL	trailer. string to print when queue empties
pw	num	132	page width
pl	num	66	page length
sb	bool	false	short banner (one line only)
sh	bool	false	suppress printing of burst page header
sf	bool	false	suppress form feeds
ic	bool	false	driver supports (non standard) ioctl
			call for indenting printout
.fi
.PP
Output is sent to the remote machine if line printer device is null.
For expamble, the following line would send output to the machine
`ucbvax'.
.PP
.ti +0.5i
:lp=:rm=ucbvax:
.PP
The `br', `fc', and  `fs' entries are used to change tty characteristics
(see
.IR tty (4)).
The `fc' and `fs' entries only set or clear the specified bits in the
.I g_flags
field; the rest are unchanged.
.PP
Error messages sent to the console have a carriage return and a line
feed appended to them, rather than just a line feed.
.PP
If the local line printer driver supports indentation, the daemon
must understand how to invoke it.
.SH BUGS
