.TH REMOTE 5 "1 March 1983"
.ad
.SH NAME
remote - remote host description file for tip
.ad
.SH DESCRIPTION
The systems known by
.IR tip (1)
and their attributes are stored in an ASCII file which
is structured somewhat like the
.IR termcap (5)
file.  Each line in the file provides a description for a single
.IR system .
Fields are separated by a colon (``:'').
Lines ending in a \e character with an immediately following newline are
continued on the next line.
.LP
The first entry is the name(s) of the host system.  If there is more
than one name for a system, the names are separated by vertical bars.
After the name of the system comes the fields of the description.  A
field name followed by an `=' sign indicates a string value follows.  A field
name followed by a `#' sign indicates a following numeric value.
.SH CAPABILITIES
Capabilities are either strings (str), numbers (num), or boolean
flags (bool).  A string capability is specified by 
.IR capability = value ;
e.g. ``dv=/dev/harris''.  A numeric capability is specified by
.IR capability # value ;
e.g. ``xa#99''.  A boolean capability is specified by simply listing
the capability.
.TP 0.5i
.B dv
(str)
UNIX device(s) to open to establish a connection. 
If this file refers to a terminal line,
.I tip(1)
attempts to perform an exclusive open on the device to insure only
one user at a time has access to the port.
.TP 0.5i
.B el
(str)
Characters marking an end-of-line. 
The default is NULL.  `~' escapes are only
recognized by
.I tip
after one of the characters in `el',
or after a carriage-return.
.TP 0.5i
.B du
(bool)
This host is on a dial-up line. 
.TP 0.5i
.B ie
(str)
Input end-of-file marks.
The default is NULL.
.TP 0.5i
.B oe
(str)
Output end-of-file string.
The default is NULL.  When 
.I tip
is transferring a file, this
string is sent at end-of-file.
.TP 0.5i
.B cu
(str)
Call unit if making a phone call.
Default is the same as the `dv' field.
.TP 0.5i
.B at
(str)
Auto call unit type.
.TP 0.5i
.B pn
(str)
Telephone number(s) for this host.
If the telephone number field contains
an @ sign, 
.I tip
searches the file
.I /etc/phones
file for a list of telephone numbers;
c.f.
.IR phones (5).
.TP 0.5i
.B br
(num)
The baud rate used in establishling
a connection to the remote host.
This is a decimal number. 
The default baud rate is 300 baud.
.TP 0.5i
.B fs
(str)
Frame size for transfers. 
The default frame size is equal to BUFSIZ.
.TP 0.5i
.B tc
(str)
Indicates that the list of capabilities is continued
in the named description.  This is used
primarily to share common capability information.
.LP
Here is a short example showing the use of the capability continuation
feature:
.nf
.ta 0.5i
UNIX-1200:\e
	:dv=/dev/cau0:el=^D^U^C^S^Q^O@:du:at=ventel:ie=#$%:oe=^D:br#1200:
arpavax|ax:\e
	:pn=7654321%:tc=UNIX-1200
.fi
.SH FILES
/etc/remote
.SH "SEE ALSO"
tip(1),
phones(5)
