.\" Copyright (c) 1980 Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.  The Berkeley software License Agreement
.\" specifies the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.\"
.\"	@(#)vadvise.2v	4.1 (Berkeley) 5/9/85
.\"
.TH VADVISE 2V
.UC 4
.SH NAME
vadvise \- give advice to paging system
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B vadvise(param)
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Vadvise
is used to inform the system that process paging behavior merits special
consideration.  Parameters to
.I vadvise
are defined in the file
.B <vadvise.h> .
Currently, two calls to
.I vadvise
are implemented:
.PP
The call
.IP
.B "vadvise(VA_ANOM);"
.LP
advises that the paging behavior is not likely to
be well handled by the system's default algorithm, since reference information
collected over macroscopic intervals (e.g. 10-20 seconds)
will not serve to indicate future page references.  The system in this case
will choose to replace pages with little emphasis placed on recent usage,
and more emphasis on referenceless circular behavior.  It is \fIessential\fR
that processes which have very random paging behavior (such as
LISP during garbage collection of very large address spaces) call
.I vadvise,
as otherwise the system has great difficulty dealing with their
page-consumptive demands.
.PP
The call
.IP
.B "vadvise(VA_NORM);"
.LP
restores default paging replacement behavior after a call to
.IP
.B "vadvise(VA_ANOM);"
.SH BUGS
This call is peculiar to this version of UNIX.
The options and specifications of this system call and even the call itself
are expected to change.  It is expected to be extended with additional
facilities in future versions of the system.  In particular it is expected
that this call will be particular to a segment, and that other behaviors
such as sequential behavior will be specifiable.
