.TH SETQUOTA 2 "7 July 1983"
.UC 4
.SH NAME
setquota \- enable/disable quotas on a file system
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B setquota(special, file)
.B char *special, *file;
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
Disc quotas are enabled or disabled with the
.I setquota
call.
.I Special
indicates a block special device on which a
mounted file system exists.
If
.I file
is nonzero, it specifies a file in that
file system from which to take the quotas.  If
.I file
is 0, then quotas are disabled on the file system.
The quota file must exist; it is normally created
with the 
.IR checkquota (8)
program.
.PP
Only the super-user may turn quotas on or off.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
quota(2), quotacheck(8), quotaon(8)
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
A 0 return value indicates a successful call.  A value
of \-1 is returned when an error occurs and 
.I errno
is set to indicate the reason for failure.
.SH ERRORS
.I Setquota
will fail when one of the following occurs:
.TP 15
[NODEV]
The caller is not the super-user.
.TP 15
[NODEV]
.I Special
does not exist.
.TP 15
[ENOTBLK]
.I Special
is not a block device.
.TP 15
[ENXIO]
The major device number of 
.I special
is out of range (this indicates no device driver exists
for the associated hardware).
.TP 15
[EPERM]
The pathname contains a character with the high-order bit set.
.TP 15
[ENOTDIR]
A component of the path prefix in
.I file
is not a directory.
.TP 15
[EROFS]
.I File
resides on a read-only file system.
.TP 15
[EACCES]
.I File
resides on a file system different from
.IR special .
.TP 15
[EACCES]
.I File
is not a plain file.
.SH BUGS
The error codes are in a state of disarray; too many errors
appear to the caller as one value.
