.TH CHARSET 1 5/23/85
.UC 4
.tr -\-
.\" differences between troff and nroff compensated here:
.ie t .ds sc \(sc
.el .ds sc section\ 
.ds lq \&"\"
.ds rq \&"\"
.if t \
.	ds lq ``
.if t \
.	ds rq ''
.SH NAME
charset - print all characters within a given character subset of an interpress font
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B charset
[
.BI \-p subset
] [
.BI \-s pointsize
] [
.BI \-o outputfile
]  fontname
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Charset
will create an interpress master which will print a specified character subset
of an interpress font at a given point size.
.PP
The specification for fontname is treated as the final identifier of the 
universal naming scheme in \(sc3.2.2 in
.I Interpress Electronic Printing Standard
(\s8XSIS\s0 048404).  The name specified is appended to "Xerox/XC1-1-1/" to
form the full interpress name.
.PP
The following options are understood:
.TP
.BI \-p subset
The number of the character subset to be printed.  This is specified in
octal and defaults to character subset 0.
.TP
.BI \-s pointsize
The point size to be used for the font to be printed.  This is specified in
decimal and defaults to 10.
.TP
.BI \-o outputfile
The name of the file to be created as the interpress master.
If the option is omitted, the interpress master will be created on the
standard ouptut, so it is best to redirect this to a file or pipe to the
queueing software. Note that
.IR outputfile
may directly follow the
.B \-o
or it may be the next argument in the list.
.SH FILES
.DT
/usr/local/lib/font/devipress	device and font information
.SH SEE ALSO
Interpress Electronic Printing Standard, \s8XSIS\s0 048404
.SH AUTHOR
William LeFebvre, Webster Research Center, Xerox Corporation
.SH BUGS
The output file is not automatically queued for printing.
