.TH DIPRESS 1 5/23/85
.UC 4
.tr -\-
.\" differences between troff and nroff compensated here:
.ie t .ds sc \(sc
.el .ds sc section\ 
.ds lq \&"\"
.ds rq \&"\"
.if t \
.	ds lq ``
.if t \
.	ds rq ''
.SH NAME
dipress - convert device independent troff output to interpress
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dipress
[
.BI -f directory
] [
.BI -o list
] [
.B -t
] [ file ] ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Dipress
take the output of device independent
.IR troff (1)
found in the files specified,
produce an interpress file, and queue that file for printing on the
interpress printer.  If no files are specified, then standard input
is used.  The following options are understood:
.TP
.BI -f directory
Take font information from
.I directory
instead of the default.
.TP
.BI -o list
Print pages whose numbers are given in the comma\(hyseparated
.IR list .
The list contains single numbers
.I N
and ranges
.IB N1 \- N2.
A missing 
.I N1
means the lowest numbered page, a missing
.I N2
means the highest.
.TP
.B -t
Direct output to standard output rather than the printer.  No queueing
is performed if this option is specified.  Redirecting standard output
is highly recommended when this option is used.
.SH FILES
.DT
/usr/local/lib/font/devipress	device and font information
.SH "SEE ALSO"
troff(1)
.SH AUTHOR
William LeFebvre, Webster Research Center, Xerox Corporation
.SH BUGS
If you have Services 11 or earlier on your printer, long boxes will
experience a small overshoot at the right end.
.PP
For a similar reason, it is recommended that the -\fBD\fR option be used
with
.IR pic(1).
Any pictures built with the drawing commands will not show up on the
Xerox 8700/9700.  That printer uses a different representation for bitmaps
than the 8044.
