.\" Copyright (c) 1988, 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" %sccs.include.redist.man%
.\"
.\"     @(#)dmv.4	8.1 (Berkeley) %G%
.\"
.Dd 
.Dt DMV 4 vax
.Os BSD 4.3
.Sh NAME
.Nm dmv
.Nd
.Tn DEC
.Tn DMV-11
point-to-point communications device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device dmv0 at uba0 csr 167000 vector dmvrint dmvxint"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm dmv
interface provides access to a point-to-point communications
device which runs at up to 56 Kb/s.
.Tn DMV-11 Ns s
communicate
using the
.Tn DEC
.Tn DDCMP
link layer protocol.
.Pp
The host's address must be specified with an
.Dv SIOCSIFADDR
.Xr ioctl 2 ,
and the destination address specified with a
.Dv SIOCSIFDSTADDR
.Xr ioctl ,
before the interface will transmit or receive any packets.
.Sh ROUTING
The driver places a
.Tn HOST
entry in the kernel routing tables for the
address given in the
.Dv SIOCSIFDSTADDR
.Xr ioctl .
To use the
.Tn DMV
as a
link between local nets, the route to the remote net must be added manually
with the
.Xr route 8
command, or by the use of the routing process
.Xr routed 8
on each end of the link.
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It dmvprobe: can't start device.
.It "dmvprobe: device init failed, bsel4=%o, bsel6=%o."
The probe routine was unable to start the device.
.Pp
.It dmvinit: dmv%d not running.
.It dmvrestart: can't start device.
.It "dmv%d: device init failed, bsel4=%o, bsel6=%o."
The initialization/restart routine was unable to start the device.
.Pp
.It dmv%d: far end on-line.
The other end of the connection has come online.
.Pp
.It dmv%d: far end restart.
The other end of the line has restarted.
.Pp
.It dmv%d: bad control %o.
A bad parameter was passed to the
.Em dmvload
routine.
.Pp
.It "dmvxint: dmv%d bad rcv pkt addr 0x%x len 0x%x."
A bad packet was received.
.Pp
.It "dmv%d: bad packet address 0x%x."
An input packet was received which contained a type of
address unknown to the driver.
.Pp
.It "dmvxint: dmv%d unallocated packet 0x%x."
A protocol error has occured with the board.
.Pp
.It "dmvoutput, dmv%d can't handle af%d."
A packet for an unsupported address family has been sent.
.Pp
.It "dmv%d: output timeout, bsel0=%b bsel2=%b."
A device timeout occurred.
.El
.Pp
Numerous other device errors may be displayed.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr dmc 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr inet 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver appeared in
.Bx 4.3 tahoe .
