.\" This source code is a product of Sun Microsystems, Inc. and is provided
.\" for unrestricted use provided that this legend is included on all tape
.\" media and as a part of the software program in whole or part.  Users
.\" may copy or modify this source code without charge, but are not authorized
.\" to license or distribute it to anyone else except as part of a product or
.\" program developed by the user.
.\"
.\" THIS PROGRAM CONTAINS SOURCE CODE COPYRIGHTED BY SUN MICROSYSTEMS, INC.
.\" SUN MICROSYSTEMS, INC., MAKES NO REPRESENTATIONS ABOUT THE SUITABLITY
.\" OF SUCH SOURCE CODE FOR ANY PURPOSE.  IT IS PROVIDED "AS IS" WITHOUT
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTY OF ANY KIND.  SUN MICROSYSTEMS, INC. DISCLAIMS
.\" ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO SUCH SOURCE CODE, INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  IN
.\" NO EVENT SHALL SUN MICROSYSTEMS, INC. BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING
.\" FROM USE OF SUCH SOURCE CODE, REGARDLESS OF THE THEORY OF LIABILITY.
.\" 
.\" This source code is provided with no support and without any obligation on
.\" the part of Sun Microsystems, Inc. to assist in its use, correction, 
.\" modification or enhancement.
.\"
.\" SUN MICROSYSTEMS, INC. SHALL HAVE NO LIABILITY WITH RESPECT TO THE
.\" INFRINGEMENT OF COPYRIGHTS, TRADE SECRETS OR ANY PATENTS BY THIS
.\" SOURCE CODE OR ANY PART THEREOF.
.\"
.\" Sun Microsystems, Inc.
.\" 2550 Garcia Avenue
.\" Mountain View, California 94043
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1991 Sun Microsystems, Inc.
.\"
.\" @(#)ldd.1 1.5 88/02/26
.TH LDD 1 "12 November 1987"
.SH NAME
ldd \- list dynamic dependencies
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ldd
.I filename
.B .\|.\|.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.IX "ldd command" "" "\fLldd\fP \(em list dynamic dependencies"
.IX "ldd command" "" "\fLldd\fP \(em list shared libraries"
.IX display "dynamic dependencies \(em \fLldd\fP"
.IX "shared libraries" "display users of \(em \fLldd\fP"
For each
.I filename ,
.B ldd
lists the dynamically loaded objects on which that 
.I filename
depends, if any.  If the dynamic dependency is a ``library'' (a so-called 
``shared library''), then both the canonical form of the library name and
version and the actual pathname used to access the library are listed.
For example, if a given
.I filename
uses a shared C library version 4, which has the name
.B /usr/lib/libc.so.4.9
(where 9 is the most recent revision to interface version number 4)
then
.B ldd
.I filename
will report:
.sp 1
.nf
.ft B
filename:
	-lc.4 => /usr/lib/libc.so.4.9
.ft P
.fi
.sp 1
For each
.I filename
which is 
not an executable program, or else does not require any dynamic objects
for its execution, 
.B ldd
will issue an appropriate diagnostic.
.LP
It should be noted that although all
dynamically linked programs depend on the
file
.B /usr/lib/ld.so ,
.B ldd
will never report this dependency.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR ld (1)
