.TH HY 4V "31 January 1983"
.UC 4
\"	@(#)hyroute.4i	1.1 Hyperchannel Driver 1/31/83
.SH NAME
hy \- Network Systems Hyperchannel Interface
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B "device hy0 at uba0 csr 0172410 flags 1 vector hyint"
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I hy
interface provides access to a Network
Systems Corporation Hyperchannel Adapter.
In configuring, the flags value is used to define the 
network to which the interface is attached.
The host's address is discovered at boot time
by reading adapter status.
.PP
The interface currently handles only Internet addresses.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
\fBhy%d: unit number 0x%x port %d type %x microcode level 0x%x\fP.
Identifies the device during autoconfiguration.
.PP
\fBhy%d: can't handle af%d\fP.  The interface was handed
a message with addresses formatted in an unsuitable address
family; the packet was dropped.
.PP
\fBhy%d: can't initialize\fP.
The interface was unable to allocate UNIBUS resources. This
is usually due to having too many network devices on an 11/750
where there are only 3 buffered data paths.
.PP
\fBhy%d: NEX - Non Existant Memory\fP.
Non existant memory error returned from hardware.
.PP
\fBhy%d:  BAR overflow\fP.  Bus address register
overflow error returned from hardware.
.PP
\fBhy%d: Power Off bit set, trying to reset\fP.
Adapter has lost power, driver will reset the bit
and see if power is still out in the adapter.
.PP
\fBhy%d: Power Off Error, network shutdown\fP.
Power was really off in the adapter, network
connections are dropped.
Software does not shut down the network unless
power has been off for a while.
.PP
\fBhy%d: RECVD MP > MPSIZE (%d)\fP.
A message proper was recieved that is too big.
Probable a driver bug.
Shouldn't happen.
.PP
\fBhy%d: xmit error - len > hy_olen [%d > %d]\fP.
Probable driver error.
Shouldn't happen.
.PP
\fBhy%d: DRIVER BUG - INVALID STATE %d\fP.
The driver state machine reached a non-existant state.
Definite driver bug.
.PP
\fBhy%d: watchdog timer expired\fP.
A command in the adapter has taken too long to complete.
Driver will abort and retry the command.
.PP
\fBhy%d: adapter power restored\fP.
Software was able to reset the power off bit,
indicating that the power has been restored.
.SH SEE ALSO
intro(4N), inet(4F)
.SH BUGS
If the adapter does not respond to the status command
issued during autoconfigure, the adapter is assumed down.
A reboot is required to recognize it.
.PP
The adapter power fail interrupt seems to occur
sporadically when power has, in fact, not failed.
The driver will not believe that power has failed
unless it can't reset the power fail latch after
a "reasonable" time interval.
These seem to appear about 2-4 times a day on some machines.
There seems to be no correlation with adapter
rev level, number of ports used etc. and whether a
machine will get these ``bogus powerfails''.
They don't seem to cause any real problems so they have
been ignored.
.PP
The driver has support left in for using a DEC DR-11B
interface instead of the NSC PI-13 interface.
This code has not been tested with this version of
the driver, but was mechanically carried over from a
3Com/Unet driver.
.SH AUTHORS
Steve Glaser and Rick Krull
