.\" Copyright (c) 1986, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" %sccs.include.proprietary.roff%
.\"
.\"	@(#)man.7	8.2 (Berkeley) %G%
.\"
.TH MAN 7 ""
.AT 3
.SH NAME
man \- (deprecated) macros to typeset manual
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B
nroff  \-man\ 
file ...
.PP
.B
troff  \-man\ 
file ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
These macros were used in the past to lay out pages of this manual.
A skeleton page may
be found in the file /usr/share/misc/man.template.
The new macros are in mdoc(7).
.PP
Any text argument
.I t
may be zero to six words.
Quotes may be used to include blanks in a `word'.
If 
.I text
is empty,
special treatment is applied to
the next input line with text to be printed.
In this way
.BR . I
may be used to italicize a whole line, or
.BR . SM
may be
followed by
.BR . B
to make small bold letters.
.PP
A prevailing indent distance is remembered between
successive indented paragraphs,
and is reset to default value upon reaching a non-indented paragraph.
Default units for indents
.I i
are ens.
.PP
Type font and size are reset to default values
before each paragraph, and after processing
font and size setting macros.
.PP
These strings are predefined by
.BR \-man :
.IP \e*R
.if t `\*R', `(Reg)' in
.if t .I nroff.
.if n `(Reg)', trademark symbol in
.if n .I troff.
.IP \e*S
Change to default type size.
.SH FILES
/usr/share/tmac/tmac.an
.br
/usr/man/man.template
.SH SEE ALSO
man(1), troff(1)
.SH BUGS
Relative indents don't nest.
.SH REQUESTS
.ta \w'.TH n c x v m'u +\w'Cause 'u +\w'Argument\ 'u
.di xx
			\ka
.br
.di
.in \nau
.ti 0
Request	Cause	If no	Explanation
.ti 0
	Break	Argument
.ti 0
.tr ~.
~B \fIt\fR	no	\fIt\fR=n.t.l.*	Text
.I t
is bold.
.ti 0
~BI \fIt\fR	no	\fIt\fR=n.t.l.	Join
words of
.I t
alternating bold and italic.
.ti 0
~BR \fIt\fR	no	\fIt\fR=n.t.l.	Join
words of
.I t
alternating bold and Roman.
.ti 0
~DT	no	.5i 1i...	Restore default tabs.
.ti 0
~HP \fIi\fR	yes	\fIi\fR=p.i.*	Set prevailing indent to
.I i.
Begin paragraph with hanging indent.
.ti 0
~I \fIt\fR	no	\fIt\fR=n.t.l.	Text
.I t
is italic.
.ti 0
~IB \fIt\fR	no	\fIt\fR=n.t.l.	Join
words of
.I t
alternating italic and bold.
.ti 0
~IP \fIx i\fR	yes	\fIx\fR=""	Same as .TP with tag
.I x.
.ti 0
~IR \fIt\fR	no	\fIt\fR=n.t.l.	Join
words of
.I t
alternating italic and Roman.
.ti 0
~LP	yes	-	Same as .PP.
.ti 0
~PD \fId\fR	no	\fId\fR=.4v	Interparagraph distance is 
.I d.
.ti 0
~PP	yes	-	Begin paragraph.
Set prevailing indent to .5i.
.ti 0
~RE	yes	-	End of relative indent.
Set prevailing indent to amount of starting .RS.
.ti 0
~RB \fIt\fR	no	\fIt\fR=n.t.l.	Join
words of
.I t
alternating Roman and bold.
.ti 0
~RI \fIt\fR	no	\fIt\fR=n.t.l.	Join
words of
.I t
alternating Roman and italic.
.ti 0
~RS \fIi\fR	yes	\fIi\fR=p.i.	Start relative indent,
move left margin in distance
.I i.
Set prevailing indent to .5i for nested indents.
.ti 0
~SH \fIt\fR	yes	\fIt\fR=n.t.l.	Subhead.
.ti 0
~SM \fIt\fR	no	\fIt\fR=n.t.l.	Text
.I t
is small.
.ti 0
~TH \fIn c x v m\fR	yes	-	Begin page named
.I n
of chapter
.IR c;
.I x
is extra commentary, e.g. `local', for page foot center;
.I v
alters page foot left, e.g. `4th Berkeley Distribution';
.I m
alters page head center, e.g. `Brand X Programmer's Manual'.
Set prevailing indent and tabs to .5i.
.ti 0
~TP \fIi\fR	yes	\fIi\fR=p.i.	Set prevailing indent to
.I i.
Begin indented paragraph
with hanging tag given by next text line.
If tag doesn't fit, place it on separate line.
.PP
.ti 0
* n.t.l. = next text line; p.i. = prevailing indent
