.TH RESIZE 1 "1 Nov 1986" "X Version 10"
.SH NAME
resize - reset TERMCAP with current size of a window
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B resize
[-u] [\-s [row col]]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Resize
prints on its standard output the TERM and TERMCAP commands for
the C-shell of the current size of a window.  It is never executed directly,
but should be aliased similarly to
.IR tset (1)
to cause the C-shell to execute the commands.
.PP
Normally, VT102 escape sequences are used.
With the
.B \-s
option, Sun tty escape sequences are used, which has the advantage that
a new row and column size may be specified and the window will
resize appropriately.
.PP
For example, the following alias when executed as a command will reset
the environment of the current shell:
.sp
	alias xs	\'set noglob; eval \`resize\`\'
.br
	alias xrs	\'set noglob; eval \`resize \-s \e!\e*\`\'
.br
.PP
The
.B \-u
option will cause the commands to be formed appropriately for sh
(the Bourne shell) rather than csh.
.SH FILES
/etc/termcap	for the base termcap entry to modify.
.br
~/.cshrc	user's alias for the command.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
csh(1), tset(1), xterm(1)
.SH AUTHORS
Mark Vandevoorde (MIT-Athena), Edward Moy (Berkeley)
.br
Copyright (c) 1984, 1985 by Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
.br
See
.IR X (1)
for a complete copyright notice.
.SH BUGS
``-u'' must appear to the left of ``-s'' if both are specified.
.PP
There should be some global notion of display size; termcap and
terminfo need to be rethought in the context of window systems.
(Fixed in 4.3BSD, and Ultrix-32 1.2)
