.TH XFAX 1 "12 December 1985" "X Version 10"
.SH NAME
xfax - display a FAX file in an X window
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B xfax
[ options ] [ =\fIgeometry\fP ] [ \fIhost\fP:\fInumber\fP ] file
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Xfax
displays a Dacom 450/500 Facsimile file (see NIC RFC 803) in an X window.
By default, the host and display number are extracted from the
environment variable ``DISPLAY'', but one can specify a different host in
the command line.
The window is created in the usual way using a geometry specification
or using a mouse button.  Clicking left creates a full screen window.
With the center button, depress the button to define one corner of the window,
move the cursor to where the opposite corner of the window should be
and release the button.
.PP
Decoding the file usually takes no more than a minute, and then the file
is displayed.  You can move around in the file by pressing the center button
in one spot, moving somewhere, and releasing the button.  The spot you
pointed at first will move to the spot you pointed at last.
.SH OPTIONS
On color displays, colors can be specified in the command line:
.PP
.nf
	\fB-fg=\fP\fIcolor\fP		foreground
	\fB-bg=\fP\fIcolor\fP		background
	\fB-bd=\fP\fIcolor\fP		border
	\fB-ms=\fP\fIcolor\fP		mouse
.fi
.SH X DEFAULTS
.PP
.TP 8
.B Background
To determine the background color.
.PP
.TP 8
.B Border
To determine the border color.
.PP
.TP 8
.B BorderWidth
To determine the border width.
.PP
.TP 8
.B Foreground
To determine the foreground color.
.PP
.TP 8
.B Mouse
To determine the mouse cursor color.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
DISPLAY	This program gets the display to use by default from this variable.
.SH AUTHOR
Bob Scheifler, MIT Laboratory for Computer Science.
.br
Copyright (c) 1985, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
.SH "SEE ALSO"
X(1)
