.TH MACGET local "31 July 1984"
.UC 4
.SH NAME
macget \- receive file from macintosh via modem7/macterminal
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B macget
[
.B \-rdu
] [file]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Macget
receives a file from a Macintosh running MacTerminal.
The File Transfer settings should specify the "Modem7"
transfer method and a "MacTerminal" remote system.
This program is designed for use with the 0.5 Beta and newer
versions of MacTerminal, but includes a compatibility option for the
older -0.15X Almost-Alpha version.
.PP
To use this program, log into the unix system using MacTerminal,
start macget with the desired options, select "Send File..." from
the "File" menu, and open the file you wish to send.
If MacTerminal is properly configured, it will put up an indicator
showing how much of the file has been transfered.
Several Control-X's may be used to force macget
to give up if the transfer fails.
.PP
The optional 
.I file
parameter specifies the name to use when creating the unix files,
otherwise the Mac file name is used
(with spaces converted to underscores).
.PP
If none of the
.B \-rdu
flags are specified, 
.I macget 
receives three files from the Mac:
.IB file .info ,
.IB file .data ,
and
.IB file .rsrc .
This mode is useful for storing Mac files so they can
be restored later using
.IR macput .
.PP
The
.B \-r
flag specifies 
.I resource
mode.
Only 
.IB file .rsrc
will be created, from the Mac file's resource fork.
.PP
The
.B \-d
flag specifies 
.I data
mode.
Only
.IB file .data
will be created, containing the data fork of the Mac file.
.PP
The 
.B \-u
flag requests 
.I unix
mode, in which carriage returns are converted into
unix newline characters, and the unix file
.IB file .text
is created.
A file saved from Mac applications as "text only" can be transfered
using this option to convert it to a normal unix text file.
.PP
The 
.B \-o
flag specifies "old" (version -0.15X) MacTerminal compatibility mode.
You must manually disable XON/XOFF flow control in this version to
perform file transfer; this is done automatically in the newer versions.
.SH SEE ALSO
macput(local)
.SH BUGS
Doesn't work over flow controlled communication lines,
or when using rlogin.
.SH AUTHOR
Dave Johnson, Brown 7/31/84
