.TH RMAKER local "10/20/84"
.UC 4
.SH NAME
rmaker \- resource maker (compiler) for Macintosh
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rmaker
file.rc
.br
.B rmaker
[
.B \-d
type
] file.rc
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Rmaker
reads an ascii resource compiler input file "file.rc" and 
produces a Macintosh executable binary "file.rsrc".
See the Inside Mac manual "Putting Together a Macintosh Application"
for a description of this format and process.
It is also helpful to look at one of the example '.rc' files in
the SUMacC 'mac/' source directory.
.PP
Most of the commonly used resource types are implemented:
STR, HEXA, CODE, DRVR, ALRT, DITL, DLOG, WIND,
MENU, CNTL, ICON, CURS, PAT, INIT and PACK.
See the BUGS section below for exceptions.
.PP
The optional \-d (debug) switch will list out in hex the contents
of all resources matching that four letter type.
.SH SEE ALSO
"Putting Together a Macintosh Application"
.SH BUGS
If you have more than one resource of the same type, they must all
be grouped together in the file, and each resource must begin with the "Type"
statement.  
.PP
Types NOT implemented:  ICN#, PAT#, STR#, FREF, BNDL, FONT, GNRL.
You can always use an "inherited type" of HEXA (e.g. Type BNDL = HEXA)
to simulate unimplemented types.  GNRL would be even better for this
(if someone would only implement it!)
.PP
If you get the message "impossible relocation", it usually means your
b.out had some undefined external references;  check the error output
from 'ld', you probably misspelled some global or routine name.
