\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename uucp.info
@settitle Taylor UUCP
@setchapternewpage odd
@c %**end of header
@setchapternewpage odd

@ignore
---------------------------------------------------------------------->
Franc,ois Pinard says:

Hi, Ian!  This is the promised merging of the current documents from
Taylor UUCP 1.01, plus the patches to documentation you sent to me, into
a taylor.texi file.  Many things remain to do, among which:

- merging in the Taylor UUCP program man pages.
- integrating the three documents describing the protocol.
- gleaning miscellaneous information from my archives.
----------------------------------------------------------------------<
@end ignore

@ifinfo
This file documents Taylor UUCP, version 1.03.

Copyright @copyright{} 1992 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
preserved on all copies.

@ignore 
Permission is granted to process this file through TeX and print the
results, provided the printed document carries a copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).

@end ignore
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also that the
section entitled ``Copying'' are included exactly as in the original, and
provided that the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the
terms of a permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that the section entitled ``Copying'' may be included in a
translation approved by the author instead of in the original English.
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@title Taylor UUCP
@subtitle Version 1.03
@author Ian Lance Taylor @file{<ian@@airs.com>}

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 1992 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Published by Ian Lance Taylor @file{<ian@@airs.com>}.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also that the
section entitled ``Copying'' are included exactly as in the original, and
provided that the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the
terms of a permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that the section entitled ``Copying'' may be included in a
translation approved by the author instead of in the original English.
@end titlepage

@node Top, Copying, (dir), (dir)
@top Taylor UUCP 1.03

This is the documentation for the Taylor UUCP package, version 1.03.
The programs were written by Ian Lance Taylor.  The author can be
reached at @file{<ian@@airs.com>}, or, equivalently,
@file{<uunet!airs!ian>}, or @cite{c/o Infinity Development, P.O. Box
520, Waltham MA, 02254}.

There is a mailing list for discussion of the package.  To join the
list, send a message to @file{<taylor-uucp-request@@gnu.ai.mit.edu>}.
Make sure you include the address you want to receive messages at; do
not rely on the @code{From:} header.  To send a message to the list,
send it to @file{<taylor-uucp@@gnu.ai.mit.edu>}.

@menu
* Copying::                     Taylor UUCP copying conditions
* Introduction::                Introduction to Taylor UUCP
* Overall Installation::        Taylor UUCP installation
* Configuration Files::         Taylor UUCP configuration files
* Protocols::                   UUCP protocol internals
* Hacking::                     Hacking Taylor UUCP
* Acknowledgements::            Acknowledgements

* Index (concepts)::            Concept index
* Index (configuration file)::  Index to new configuration files

 --- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Taylor UUCP Overall Installation

* Configuration::               Configuring Taylor UUCP
* Compilation::                 Compiling Taylor UUCP
* Testing::                     Testing Taylor UUCP
* Installation::                Installing Taylor UUCP
* Usage::                       Using Taylor UUCP
* TCP::                         TCP together with Taylor UUCP

Taylor UUCP Configuration Files

* Configuration File Format::   Configuration file format
* Configuration Examples::      Examples of configuration files
* Time Strings::                How to write time strings
* Chat Scripts::                How to write chat scripts
* config File::                 The main configuration file
* sys File::                    The system configuration file
* port File::                   The port configuration files
* dial File::                   The dialer configuration files
* Security::                    Security issues

Examples of Configuration Files

* config File Examples::        Examples of the main configuration file
* Leaf Example::                Call a single remote site
* Gateway Example::             The gateway for several local systems

The Main Configuration File

* Miscellaneous (config)::      Miscellaneous config file commands
* Configuration File Names::    Using different configuration files
* Log File Names::              Using different log files
* Debugging Levels::            Debugging levels

The System Configuration File

* Defaults and Alternates::     Using defaults and alternates
* Naming the System::           Naming the system
* Calling Out::                 Calling out
* Accepting a Call::            Accepting a call
* Protocol Selection::          Protocol selection
* File Transfer Control::       File transfer control
* Miscellaneous (sys)::         Miscellaneous sys file commands
* Default sys File Values::     Default values

Calling Out

* When to Call::                When to call
* Placing the Call::            Placing the call
* Logging In::                  Logging in

UUCP protocol internals

* Grades::                      UUCP grades
* Lock Files::                  UUCP lock file format
* UUCP Protocol::               The common UUCP protocol
* g Protocol::                  The UUCP @samp{g} protocol
* f Protocol::                  The UUCP @samp{f} protocol
* t Protocol::                  The UUCP @samp{t} protocol
* e Protocol::                  The UUCP @samp{e} protocol
* x Protocol::                  The UUCP @samp{x} protocol
* d Protocol::                  The UUCP @samp{d} protocol
* Capital G Protocol::          The UUCP @samp{G} protocol
* Documentation References::    Documentation references

The Common UUCP Protocol

* Initial Handshake::           Initial handshake
* File Requests::               File requests
* Final Handshake::             Final handshake

File Requests

* S Request::                   S request
* R Request::                   R request
* X Request::                   X request
* H Request::                   H request

Hacking Taylor UUCP

* System Dependence::           System Dependence
* Naming Conventions::          Naming Conventions
* Patches::                     Patches
@end menu

@node Copying, Introduction, Top, Top
@unnumbered Taylor UUCP Copying Conditions

This package is covered by the GNU Public License.  See the file
@file{COPYING} for details.  If you would like to do something with this
package that you feel is reasonable but you feel is prohibited by the
license, contact me to see if we can work it out.

Here is some propaganda from the Free Software Foundation.  If you find
this stuff offensive or annoying, remember that you probably did not
spend any money to get this code.  I did not write this code to make
life easier for developers of UUCP packages, I wrote it to help end
users, and I believe that these are the most appropriate conditions for
distribution.

All the programs, scripts and documents relating to Taylor UUCP are
@dfn{free}; this means that everyone is free to use them and free to
redistribute them on a free basis.  The Taylor UUCP-related programs are
not in the public domain; they are copyrighted and there are
restrictions on their distribution, but these restrictions are designed
to permit everything that a good cooperating citizen would want to do.
What is not allowed is to try to prevent others from further sharing any
version of these programs that they might get from you.

Specifically, we want to make sure that you have the right to give away
copies of the programs that relate to Taylor UUCP, that you receive
source code or else can get it if you want it, that you can change these
programs or use pieces of them in new free programs, and that you know
you can do these things.

To make sure that everyone has such rights, we have to forbid you to
deprive anyone else of these rights.  For example, if you distribute
copies of the Taylor UUCP related programs, you must give the recipients
all the rights that you have.  You must make sure that they, too,
receive or can get the source code.  And you must tell them their
rights.

Also, for our own protection, we must make certain that everyone finds
out that there is no warranty for the programs that relate to Taylor
UUCP.  If these programs are modified by someone else and passed on, we
want their recipients to know that what they have is not what we
distributed, so that any problems introduced by others will not reflect
on our reputation.

The precise conditions of the licenses for the programs currently being
distributed that relate to Taylor UUCP are found in the General Public
Licenses that accompany them.

@node Introduction, Overall Installation, Copying, Top
@chapter Introduction to Taylor UUCP

General introductions to UUCP are available, and perhaps one day I will
write one.  In the meantime, here is a very brief one that concentrates
on the programs provided by Taylor UUCP.

Taylor UUCP is a complete UUCP package.  It is covered by the GNU Public
License, which means that the source code is always available.  It is
composed of several programs, the names of which were established by
earlier UUCP packages.

@table @code

@item uucp

The @code{uucp} program is used to copy file between systems.  It is
similar to the standard Unix @code{cp} program, except that you can
refer to a file on a remote system by using @samp{system!} before the
file name.  For example, to copy the file @file{notes.txt} to the system
@samp{airs}, you would say @samp{uucp notes.txt airs!~/notes.txt}.  In
this example @samp{~} is used to name the UUCP public directory on
@samp{airs}.

@item uux

The @code{uux} program is used to request a program to be executed on a
remote system.  This is how mail and news are transferred over UUCP.  As
with @code{uucp}, programs and files on remote systems may be named by
using @samp{system!}.  For example, to run the @code{rnews} program on
@samp{airs} passing it standard input, you would say @samp{uux -
airs!rnews}.  The @samp{-} means to read standard input and set things
up so that when @code{rnews} runs on @samp{airs} it will receive the
same standard input.

@end table

Neither @code{uucp} nor @code{uux} actually do any work immediately.
Instead, they queue up requests for later processing.  They then start a
daemon process which processes the requests and calls up the appropriate
systems.  Usually the daemon will also be started regularly to check if
there is any work to be done and to do it.  The advantage of this system
is that it all happens automatically.  You don't have to sit around
waiting for the files to be transferred.  The disadvantage is that if
anything goes wrong it might be a while before anybody notices.

@table @code

@item uustat

The @code{uustat} program does several things.  By default it will
simply list all the jobs you have queued with @code{uucp} or @code{uux}
that have not yet been processed.  You can use @code{uustat} to remove
any of your jobs from the queue.  You can also it use it to show the
status of the UUCP system in various ways, such as showing the
connection status of all systems your system knows about.

@item uuname

The @code{uuname} program by default lists all the remote systems your
system knows about.  You can also use it to get the name of your local
system.  It is mostly useful for shell scripts.

@item uulog

The @code{uulog} program can be used to display entries in the UUCP log
file.  It can select the entries for a particular system or a particular
user.  You can use it to see what has happened to your queued jobs in
the past.

@end table

These five programs just described, @code{uucp}, @code{uux},
@code{uustat}, @code{uuname}, and @code{uulog}, are the user programs
provided by Taylor UUCP.  The first two add requests to the work queue,
the third examines the work queue, the fourth examines the configuration
files, and the last examines the log files.  The real work is actually
done by two daemon processes, which are normally run automatically
rather than by a user.

@table @code

@item uucico

The @code{uucico} daemon is the program which actually calls the remote
system and transfers files and requests.  @code{uucico} is normally
started automatically by @code{uucp} and @code{uux}.  Most systems will
also start it periodically to make sure that all work requests are
handled.  @code{uucico} checks the queue to see what work needs to be
done, and then calls the appropriate systems.  If the call fails,
perhaps because the phone line is busy, @code{uucico} leaves the
requests in the queue and goes on to the next system to call.  It is
also possible to force @code{uucico} to call a remote system even if
there is no work to be done for it, so that it can pick up any work that
may be queued up remotely.

@item uuxqt

The @code{uuxqt} daemon processes execution requests made by the
@code{uux} program on remote systems.  It also processes requests made
on the local system which require files from a remote system.  It is
normally started by @code{uucico}.

@end table

Suppose you, on the system @samp{bantam}, want to copy a file to the
system @samp{airs}.  You would run the @code{uucp} command locally, with
a command like @samp{uucp notes.txt airs!~/notes.txt}.  This would queue
up a request on @samp{bantam} for @samp{airs}, and would then start the
@code{uucico} daemon.  @code{uucico} would see that there was a request
for @samp{airs} and attempt to call it.  When the call succeeded,
another copy of @code{uucico} would be started on @samp{airs}.  The two
copies of @code{uucico} would tell each other what they had to do and
transfer the file from @samp{bantam} to @samp{airs}.  When the file
transfer was complete the @code{uucico} on @samp{airs} would move it
into the UUCP public directory.

UUCP is often used to transfer mail.  This is normally done
automatically by mailer programs.  When @samp{bantam} has a mail message
to send to @samp{ian} at @samp{airs}, it executes @samp{uux - airs!rmail
ian} and writes the mail message to the @code{uux} process as standard
input.  The @code{uux} program, running on @samp{bantam}, will read the
standard input and store it and the @code{rmail} request on the work
queue for @code{airs}.  @code{uux} will then start the @code{uucico}
daemon.  The @code{uucico} daemon will call up @samp{airs}, just as in
the @code{uucp} example, and transfer the work request and the mail
message itself.  The @code{uucico} daemon on @samp{airs} will put the
files on a local work queue.  When the communication session is over,
the @code{uucico} daemon on @samp{airs} will start the @code{uuxqt}
daemon.  @code{uuxqt} will see the request to run, and will run
@samp{rmail ian} with the mail message as standard input.  The
@code{rmail} program, which is not part of the UUCP package, is then
responsible for either putting the message in the right mailbox on
@samp{airs} or forwarding the message on to another system.

Taylor UUCP comes with two other programs that are useful when
installing and configuring UUCP.

@table @code

@item uuchk

The @code{uuchk} program reads the UUCP configuration files and displays
a rather lengthy description of what it finds.  This is very useful when
configuring UUCP to make certain that the UUCP package will do what you
expect it to do.

@item tstuu

The @code{tstuu} program is a test harness for the UUCP package, which
will help ensure that it has been configured and compiled correctly.  It
does not test everything, however, and it only runs on Unix systems
which support Berkeley style pseudo-terminals.  It can be useful when
initially installing Taylor UUCP.

@end table

@node Overall Installation, Configuration Files, Introduction, Top
@chapter Taylor UUCP Overall Installation

These are the installation instructions for the Taylor UUCP package.

@menu
* Configuration::               Configuring Taylor UUCP
* Compilation::                 Compiling Taylor UUCP
* Testing::                     Testing Taylor UUCP
* Installation::                Installing Taylor UUCP
* Usage::                       Using Taylor UUCP
* TCP::                         TCP together with Taylor UUCP
@end menu

@node Configuration, Compilation, Overall Installation, Overall Installation
@section Configuring Taylor UUCP

You will have to decide what types of configuration files you want to
use.  This package supports a new sort of configuration file;
@xref{Configuration files}.  It also supports V2 configuration files
(@file{L.sys}, @file{L-devices}, etc.) and BNU configuration files
(@file{Systems}, @file{Devices}, etc.).  No documentation is provided
for V2 or BNU configuration files.  All types of configuration files can
be used at once, if you are so inclined.  Currently using just V2
configuration files is not really possible, because there is no way to
specify a dialer (there are no built in dialers, and the program does
not know how to read @file{acucap} or @file{modemcap}); however, V2
configuration files can be used with a new style dialer file
(@pxref{dial file}), or with a BNU @file{Dialers} file.

Use of BNU configuration files has two known bugs.  A blank line in the
middle of an entry in the @file{Permissions} file will not be ignored as
it should be.  Dialer programs are not recognized directly.  If you must
use a dialer program, rather than an entry in @file{Devices}, you must
use the @code{chat-program} command in a new style dialer file; see
@ref{dial file}.  You will have to invoke the dialer program via a shell
script, since an exit code of 0 is required to recognize success.

If you are installing a new system, or you want to use the new form of
configuration files, you must write the configuration files.

You must also decide what sort of spool directory you want to use.  If
you will only be using these programs, I recommend
@samp{SPOOLDIR_TAYLOR}; otherwise select the spool directory
corresponding to your existing UUCP package.  The details of the spool
directory choices are described at somewhat tedious length in
@file{sys3.unx}.

@node Compilation, Testing, Configuration, Overall Installation
@section Compiling Taylor UUCP

@enumerate

@item
Take a look at the top of @file{Makefile.in} and set the appropriate
values for your system.  These control where the program is installed
and which user on the system owns them (normally they will be owned by a
special user @code{uucp} rather than a real person; they should probably
not be owned by @code{root}).

@item
Run the shell script @code{configure}.  This script was generated using
David MacKenzie's @code{autoconf} program.  It takes a while to run.  It
will generate a file @file{conf.h}, and copy @file{Makefile.in} to
@file{Makefile} with substitions (specifically, it will replace all
words between @kbd{@@} characters in @file{Makefile.in}).

You can pass certain arguments to @code{configure} in the environment.
Because @code{configure} will compile and run little test programs to
see what is available on your system, you must tell it how to run your
compiler.  It recognizes the following environment variables:

@table @samp
@item CC
The C compiler.  If this is not set, then if @code{configure} can find
@code{gcc} it will use @samp{gcc -O}, otherwise it will use @samp{cc}.
@item DEFS
Flags to pass the C compiler during configuration testing.  If this is
not set, @code{configure} will use the empty string.
@item CFLAGS
Flags to pass to the C compiler when compiling the actual code.  If this
is not set, @code{configure} will use @samp{-g}.
@item LDFLAGS
Flags to pass to the C compiler when only linking, not compiling.  If
this is not set, @code{configure} will use the empty string.
@item LIBS
Libraries to pass to the C compiler.  If this is not set,
@code{configure} will use the empty string.
@item INSTALL
The program to run to install UUCP in the binary directory.  If
@code{configure} finds the BSD @code{install} program, it will set this
to @samp{install -c}; otherwise, it will use @samp{cp}.
@item INSTALLDATA
The program to run to install UUCP data files, such as the man pages and
the info pages.  If @code{configure} finds the BSD @code{install}
program, it will set this to @samp{install -c -m 644}; otherwise, it
will use @samp{cp}.
@end table

Suppose you want to set the environment variable @samp{CC} to
@samp{rcc}.  If you are using @code{sh} or @code{bash}, invoke
@code{configure} as @samp{CC=rcc configure}.  If you are using
@code{csh}, do @samp{setenv CC rcc; sh configure}.

On some systems you will want to use @samp{LIBS=-lmalloc}.  On some you
will want @samp{LIBS=-lsocket}.  On Xenix derived systems do not use
@samp{LIBS=-lx} because this will bring in the wrong versions of certain
routines; if you want to use @samp{-lx} you must specify @samp{LIBS=-lc
-lx}.

If @code{configure} fails for some reason, or if you have a very wierd
system, you may have to configure the package by hand.  To do this, copy
the file @file{conf.h-dist} to @file{conf.h} and edit it for your
system.  Then copy @file{Makefile.in} to @file{Makefile}, find the words
within @kbd{@@} characters, and set them correctly for your system.

@item
You should verify that @code{configure} worked correctly by checking
the files @file{conf.h} and @file{Makefile}.  

@item
This package uses the @code{alloca} function.  The @code{configure}
script will try to figure out how to make it work on your system.  If
@code{alloca} cannot be found, a simplistic substitute from
@file{alloca.c} will be used.  If you provide your own @file{alloca.o}
file, it will be used instead; you might, for example, use the one from
the GNU emacs distribution.  If none of this makes any sense to you,
don't worry; everything will probably work fine.

@item
Edit @file{policy.h} for your local system.  The comments should explain
the various choices.  The default values are intended to be reasonable,
so you may not have to make any changes.

@item
Type @samp{make} to compile everything.  You may get warnings about
implicit function declarations; ignore these (if you think they can be
eliminated, and you really know what you are talking about, you may tell
me about them).  You may also get warnings about @file{getopt.c} (this
is from the GNU library and I do not want to change it) and about a
variable not protected from @code{setjmp} in @file{sys2.c} (the data
flow ensures that this can never be a problem).  The @file{tstuu.c} file
is not particularly portable; if you can't figure out how to compile it
you can safely ignore it, as it is only used for testing.  If you have
any other problems there is probably a bug in the @code{configure}
script.

@item
Please report any problems you have.  That is the only way they will get
fixed for other people.  Supply a patch if you can, or just ask for
help.

@end enumerate

@node Testing, Installation, Compilation, Overall Installation
@section Testing Taylor UUCP

This package is in use at many sites, and has been running at
@file{airs.com} for several months.  However, it will doubtless fail in
some situations.  Do not rely on this code until you have proven to
yourself that it will work.

You can use the @code{uuchk} program to test your configuration files.
It will read them and print out a verbose description.  This is
particularly important if you are using V2 or BNU configuration files,
because there may be bugs in how they are read.  This program should not
be made suid, because it will display passwords if it can read them.

If your system supports BSD style pseudo-terminals, and you compiled the
code to support the new style of configuration files, you should be able
to use the @code{tstuu} program to test the @code{uucico} daemon.  Just
type @samp{tstuu} with no arguments while logged in to the compilation
directory (since it runs @file{./uucp}, @file{./uux} and
@file{./uucico}) to run a lengthy series of tests (it takes over ten
minutes on a slow VAX).  You will need a fair amount of space available
in @file{/usr/tmp}.  You will probably want to put it in the background.
Do not use @kbd{^Z}, because the program traps on @code{SIGCHLD} and
winds up dying.  It will create a directory @file{/usr/tmp/tstuu} and
fill it with configuration files, and create spool directories
@file{/usr/tmp/tstuu/spool1} and @file{/usr/tmp/tstuu/spool2}.

The program will finish with an execute file @file{X.@var{something}}
and a data file @file{D.@var{something}} in @file{/usr/tmp/tstuu/spool1}
(or, more likely, in subdirectories, depending on the choice of
@code{SPOOLDIR} in @file{sysdep.h}).  The log files
@file{/usr/tmp/tstuu/Log1} and @file{/usr/tmp/tstuu/Log2} (or, if you
have selected @code{HAVE_BNU_LOGGING},
@file{/usr/tmp/tstuu/Log1/uucico/test2} and
@file{/usr/tmp/tstuu/Log2/uucico/test1}) should look fairly normal.  You
can test @code{uuxqt} by typing @samp{./uuxqt -I
/usr/tmp/tstuu/Config1}.  This should leave a command file
@file{C.@var{something}} and a data file @file{D.@var{something}} in
@file{/usr/tmp/tstuu/spool1} or in subdirectories.  Again, there should
be no errors in the log file.

Assuming you compiled the code with debugging enabled, the @samp{-x}
switch can be used to set debugging modes; see the @code{debug} command
for details (@pxref{Debugging Levels}).  Use @samp{-x all} to turn on
all debugging and generate far more output than you will ever want to
see.  The @code{uucico} daemons will put debugging output in
@file{/usr/tmp/tstuu/Debug1} and @file{/usr/tmp/tstuu/Debug2}.  At this
point you're pretty much on your own.

On some systems you can also use @code{tstuu} to test my @code{uucico}
against the system @code{uucico}, by using the @samp{-u} switch.  For
this to work, change the definitions of @code{ZUUCICO_CMD} and
@code{UUCICO_EXECL} at the top of @file{tstuu.c} to something
appropriate for your system.  The definitions in @file{tstuu.c} are what
I used for Ultrix 4.0, in which @file{/usr/lib/uucp/uucico} is
particularly obstinate about being run as a child; I was only able to
run it by creating a login name with no password whose shell was
@file{/usr/lib/uucp/uucico}.  Calling login in this way will leave fake
entries in @file{wtmp} and @file{utmp}; if you compile @file{tstout.c}
(in the @file{contrib} directory) as an suid @code{root} program,
@code{tstuu} will run it to clear those entries out.  On most systems,
such hackery should not be necessary, although on SCO I had to su to
@code{root} (@code{uucp} might also have worked) before I could run
@file{/usr/lib/uucp/uucico}.

You can test @code{uucp} and @code{uux} (give them the @samp{-r} switch
to keep them from starting @code{uucico}) to make sure they create the
right sorts of files.  Unfortunately if you don't know what the right
sorts of files are I'm not going to tell you here.

If @code{tstuu} passes, or you can't run it for some reason or other,
move on to testing with some other system.  Set up the configuration
files (@pxref{Configuration files}), or use an existing configuration.
Tell @code{uucico} to dial out to the system by using the @samp{-s}
system switch (e.g.  @samp{uucico -s uunet}).  The log file should tell
you what happens.

If you compiled the code with debugging enabled, you can use debugging
mode to get a great deal of information about what sort of data is
flowing back and forth; the various possibilities are described under
the @code{debug} command (@pxref{Debugging Levels}).  When initially
setting up a connection @samp{-x chat} is probably the most useful (e.g.
@samp{uucico -s uunet -x chat}); you may also want to use @samp{-x
handshake,incoming,outgoing}.  You can use @samp{-x} multiple times on
one command line, or you can give it comma separated arguments as in the
last example.  Use @samp{-x all} to turn on all possible debugging
information.  The debugging information is written to a file, normally
@file{/usr/spool/uucp/Debug} although the default can be changed in
@file{policy.h} and the configuration file can override the name with
the @code{debugfile} command.  The debugging file may contain passwords
and some file contents as they are transmitted over the line, so the
debugging file is only readable by the @code{uucp} user.

You can use the @samp{-f} switch to force @code{uucico} to call out even
if the last call failed recently; using @samp{-S} when naming a system
has the same effect.  Otherwise the status file (in the @file{.Status}
subdirectory of the main spool directory, normally
@file{/usr/spool/uucp}) will prevent too many attempts from occurring in
rapid succession.

Again, let me know about any problems you have and how you got around
them.

@node Installation, Usage, Testing, Overall Installation
@section Installing Taylor UUCP

You can install by suing to @code{root} and typing @samp{make install}.
Or you can look at what make install does and do it by hand.  It tries
to preserve your old programs, if any.  You can retrieve them by typing
@samp{make uninstall}.

@node Usage, TCP, Installation, Overall Installation
@section Using Taylor UUCP

This package does not come with any fancy shell scripts or scheduling
programs.  Maybe someday.  If you have another package, you may well
be able to use the scheduling mechanisms it provides.

Otherwise, the program can be used by making crontab entries.
Whenever you want to call all systems with outstanding work, use
@example
uucico -r1
@end example
Whenever you want to call a specific system @samp{foo}, use
@example
uucico -s foo
@end example
If you want to make sure that a system foo gets retried if the
original call fails, create an empty work file for it.  For example,
if using @code{SPOOLDIR_TAYLOR},
@example
touch /usr/spool/uucp/foo/C./C.A0000
@end example
If using @code{SPOOLDIR_BNU}, use
@example
touch /usr/spool/uucp/foo/C.fooA0000
@end example

I use the following crontab entries locally:

@example
45 * * * * /bin/echo /usr/lib/uucp/uucico -r1 | /bin/su uucpa
40 4,10,15 * * * touch /usr/spool/uucp/uunet/C./C.A0000
@end example

Every hour, at 45 minutes past, this will check if there is any work to
be done.  Also, at 4:40am, 10:40am and 3:40pm this will create an empty
work file for @file{uunet}, forcing the next check to call @file{uunet}.

You will also want to periodically trim the log files, which by default
are @file{/usr/spool/uucp/Log} and @file{/usr/spool/uucp/Stats}.  The
@code{savelog} program in the @file{contrib} directory may be of use.

@node TCP,  , Usage, Overall Installation
@section TCP together with Taylor UUCP

If your system has a Berkeley style socket library, you can compile
the code to permit making connections over TCP.  Specifying that a
system should be reached via TCP is easy, but nonobvious.

If you are using the new style configuration files, see
@ref{Configuration files}.  Basically, you can just add the line
@samp{port type tcp} to the entry in the system configuration file.  By
default UUCP will get the port number by looking up @samp{uucp} in
@file{/etc/services}; if @samp{uucp} is not found, port 540 will be
used.  You can set the port number to use with the command @samp{port
service @var{xxx}}, where @var{xxx} can be either a number or a name to
look up in @file{/etc/services}.  You can specify the address of the
remote host with @samp{address @var{a.b.c}}; if you don't give an
address, the remote system name will be used.  You should give an
explicit chat script for the system when you use TCP; the default chat
script begins with a carriage return, which will not work with some UUCP
TCP servers.

If you are using V2 configuration files, add a line like this to
@file{L.sys}:

@example
foo Any TCP uucp foo.domain chat-script
@end example

This will make an entry for system foo, to be called at any time, over
TCP, using port number @samp{uucp} (as found in @file{/etc/services};
this may be specified as a number), using remote host @file{foo.domain},
with some chat script.

If you are using BNU configuration files, add a line like this to
Systems:

@example
foo Any TCP - foo.domain chat-script
@end example

and a line like this to Devices:

@example
TCP uucp - -
@end example

You only need one line in Devices regardless of how many systems you
contact over TCP.  This will make an entry for system foo, to be called
at any time, over TCP, using port number @samp{uucp} (as found in
@file{/etc/services}; this may be specified as a number), using remote
host @file{foo.domain}, with some chat script.

The @code{uucico} daemon can also be run as a TCP server.  This code
mostly works, but it's not perfect.  I don't recommend investigating it
unless you are willing to tinker a bit.  You will not be able to use the
default port number because @code{uucico} will not be running as
@code{root} and will therefore not be able to bind a reserved port.

Basically, you must define a port, either using the port file
(@pxref{port file}) if you are using the new configuration method or
with an entry in Devices if you are using BNU; there is no way to define
a port using V2.  If you are using BNU the port must be named
@samp{TCP}; a line as shown above will suffice.  You can then start
@code{uucico} as @samp{uucico -p TCP} (after the @samp{-p}, name the
port; in BNU it must be @samp{TCP}).  This will wait for incoming
connections, and fork off a child for each one.  Each connection will be
prompted with @samp{login:} and @samp{Password:}; the results will be
checked against the UUCP (not the system) password file
(@pxref{Configuration File Names}).  Of course, you can get a similar
effect by using the BSD @code{uucpd} program.

You can also have @code{inetd} start up @code{uucico} with the @samp{-l}
switch, which will cause it to prompt with @samp{login:} and
@samp{Password:} and check the results against the UUCP (not the system)
password file.  This may be used in place of @code{uucpd}.

@node Configuration Files, Protocols, Overall Installation, Top
@chapter Taylor UUCP Configuration Files

This chapter describes the configuration files accepted by the Taylor
UUCP package if compiled with @code{HAVE_TAYLOR_CONFIG} defined in
@file{conf.h}.

The configuration files are normally found in the directory
@var{newconfigdir}, which is defined by the @file{Makefile} variable
@file{newconfigdir}; by default @var{newconfigdir} is
@file{/usr/local/lib/uucp}.  However, the main configuration file,
@file{config}, is the only one which must be in that directory, since it
may specify a different location for any or all of the other files.  You
may run any of the UUCP programs with a different main configuration
file by using the @samp{-I} option; this can be useful when testing a
new configuration.  When you use the @samp{-I} option the programs will
revoke their setuid privileges.

@menu
* Configuration File Format::   Configuration file format
* Configuration Examples::      Examples of configuration files
* Time Strings::                How to write time strings
* Chat Scripts::                How to write chat scripts
* config File::                 The main configuration file
* sys File::                    The system configuration file
* port File::                   The port configuration files
* dial File::                   The dialer configuration files
* Security::                    Security issues
@end menu

@node Configuration File Format, Configuration Examples, Configuration Files, Configuration Files
@section Configuration File Format

All the configuration files follow a simple line-oriented
@samp{@var{keyword} @var{value}} format.  Empty lines are ignored, as
are leading spaces; unlike BNU, lines with leading spaces are read.  The
first word on each line is a keyword.  The rest of the line is
interpreted according to the keyword.  Most keywords are followed by
numbers, boolean values or simple strings with no embedded spaces.

The @kbd{#} character is used for comments.  Everything from a @kbd{#}
to the end of the line is ignored unless the @kbd{#} is preceded by a
@kbd{\} (backslash); if the @kbd{#} is preceeded by a @kbd{\}, the
@kbd{\} is removed but the @kbd{#} remains in the line.  This can be
useful for a phone number containing a @kbd{#}.  To enter the sequence
@samp{\#}, you would use @samp{\\#}.  

The backslash character may be used to continue lines.  If the last
character in a line is a backslash, the backslash is removed and the
line is continued by the next line.  The second line is attached to the
first with no intervening characters; if you want any whitespace between
the end of the first line and the start of the second line, you must
insert it yourself.

However, the backslash is not a general quoting character.  For example,
you cannot use it to get an embedded space in a string argument.

Everything after the keyword must be on the same line.  A @var{boolean}
may be specified as @kbd{y}, @kbd{Y}, @kbd{t}, or @kbd{T} for true and
@kbd{n}, @kbd{N}, @kbd{f}, or @kbd{F} for false; any trailing characters
are ignored, so @code{true}, @code{false}, etc., are also acceptable.

@node Configuration Examples, Time Strings, Configuration File Format, Configuration Files
@section Examples of Configuration Files

All the configuration commands are explained in the following sections.
However, I'll start by giving a few examples of configuration files.
For a more complete description of any of the commands used here see the
appropriate section of this chapter.

@menu
* config File Examples::        Examples of the main configuration file
* Leaf Example::                Call a single remote site
* Gateway Example::             The gateway for several local systems
@end menu

@node config File Examples, Leaf Example, Configuration Examples, Configuration Examples
@subsection config File Examples
@cindex config file examples

To start with, here are some examples of uses of the main configuration
file, @file{config}.  For a complete description of the commands that
are permitted in @file{config}, see @ref{config file}.

In many cases you will not need to create a @file{config} file at all.
The most common reason to create one is to give your machine a special
UUCP name.  Other reasons might be to change the UUCP spool directory or
to permit any remote system to call in.

If you have an internal network of machines, then it is likely that the
internal name of your UUCP machine is not the name you want to use when
calling other systems.  For example, here at @file{airs.com} our
mail/news gateway machine is named @file{elmer.airs.com} (it is one of
several machines all named @file{@var{localname}.airs.com}).  If we did
not provide a @file{config} file, then our UUCP name would be
@file{elmer}; however, we actually want it to be @file{airs}.
Therefore, we use the following line in @file{config}:

@example
nodename airs
@end example

@cindex changing spool directory
@cindex spool directory (changing)
The UUCP spool directory name is set in @file{policy.h} when the code is
compiled.  You might at some point decide that it is appropriate to move
the spool directory, perhaps to put it on a different disk partition.
You might use the following commands in @file{config} to change to
directories on the partition @file{/uucp}:

@example
spool /uucp/spool
pubdir /uucp/uucppublic
logfile /uucp/spool/Log
debugfile /uucp/spool/Debug
@end example

You would then move the contents of the current spool directory to
@file{/uucp/spool}.  If you do this, make sure that no UUCP processes
are running while you change @file{config} and move the spool directory.

@cindex anonymous UUCP
Suppose you wanted to permit any system to call in to your system and
request files.  This is generally known as @dfn{anonymous UUCP}, since
the systems which call in are effectively anonymous.  By default,
unknown systems are not permitted to call in.  To permit this you must
use the @code{unknown} command in @file{config}.  The @code{unknown}
command is followed by any command that may appear in the system file;
for full details, see @ref{sys file}.

I will show two possible anonymous UUCP configurations.  The first will
let any system call in and download files, but will not permit them to
upload files to your system.

@example
# No files may be transferred to this system
unknown request no
# The public directory is /usr/spool/anonymous
unknown pubdir /usr/spool/anonymous
# Only files in the public directory may be sent (the default anyhow)
unknown remote-send ~
@end example

@noindent
Setting the public directory is convenient for the systems which call
in.  It permits to request a file by prefixing it with @file{~/}.  For
example, assuming your system is known as @samp{server}, then to
retrieve the file @file{/usr/spool/anonymous/INDEX} a user on a remote
site could just enter @samp{uucp server!~/INDEX ~}; this would transfer
@file{INDEX} from @samp{server}'s public directory to the user's local
public directory.  Note that when using @samp{csh} or @samp{bash} the
@kbd{!} and the second @kbd{~} must be quoted.

The next example will permit remote systems to upload files to a special
directory @file{/usr/spool/anonymous/upload}.  Permitting a remote
system to upload files permits it to send work requests as well; this
example is careful to prohibit commands from unknown systems.

@example
# No commands may be executed (the list of permitted commands is empty)
unknown commands
# The public directory is /usr/spool/anonymous
unknown pubdir /usr/spool/anonymous
# Only files in the public directory may be sent; users may not download
# files from the upload directory
unknown remote-send ~ !~/upload
# May only upload files into /usr/spool/anonymous/upload
unknown remote-receive ~/upload
@end example

@node Leaf Example, Gateway Example, config File Examples, Configuration Examples
@subsection Leaf Example

@cindex leaf site
@cindex sys file example (leaf)
A relatively common simple case is a @dfn{leaf site}, a system which
only calls or is called by a single remote site.  Here is a typical
@file{sys} file that might be used in such a case.  For full details on
what commands can appear in the @file{sys} file, see @ref{sys file}.

This is the @file{sys} file that is used at @file{airs.com}.  We use a
single modem to dial out to @file{uunet}.  This example shows how you
can specify the port and dialer information directly in the @file{sys}
file for simple cases.  It also shows the use of the following:

@table @code

@item call-login
Using @code{call-login} and @code{call-password} allows the default
login chat script to be used.  In this case, the login name is specified
in the call-out login file (@pxref{Configuration File Names}).

@item call-timegrade
@file{uunet} is requested to not send us news during the daytime.

@item chat-fail
If the modem returns @samp{BUSY} or @samp{NO CARRIER} the call is
immediately aborted.

@item protocol-parameter
Since @file{uunet} tends to be slow, the default timeout has been
increased.

@end table

This @file{sys} file relies on certain defaults.  It will allow
@file{uunet} to queue up @samp{rmail} and @samp{rnews} commands.  It
will allow users to request files from @file{uunet} into the UUCP public
directory.  It will also @file{uunet} to request files from the UUCP
public directory; in fact @file{uunet} never requests files, but for
additional security we could add the line @samp{request false}.

@example
# The following information is for uunet
system uunet

# The login name and password are kept in the callout password file
call-login *
call-password *

# We can send anything at any time.
time any

# During the day we only accept grade 'Z' or above; at other times
# (not mentioned here) we accept all grades.  uunet queues up news
# at grade 'd', which is lower than 'Z'.
call-timegrade Z Wk0755-2305,Su1655-2305

# The phone number.
phone 7389449

# uunet tends to be slow, so we increase the timeout
chat-timeout 120

# We are using a preconfigured Telebit 2500.
port type modem
port device /dev/ttyd0
port baud 19200
port carrier true
port dialer chat "" ATZ\r\d\c OK ATDT\D CONNECT
port dialer chat-fail BUSY
port dialer chat-fail NO\sCARRIER
port dialer complete \d\d+++\d\dATH\r\c
port dialer abort \d\d+++\d\dATH\r\c

# Increase the timeout and the number of retries.
protocol-parameter g timeout 20
protocol-parameter g retries 10
@end example

@node Gateway Example,  , Leaf Example, Configuration Examples
@subsection Gateway Example

@cindex gateway
@cindex sys file example (gateway)
Many organizations have several local machines which are connected by
UUCP, and a single machine which connects to the outside world.  This
single machine is often referred to as a @dfn{gateway} machine.

For this example I will assume a fairly simple case.  It should still
provide a good general example.  There are three machines, @file{elmer},
@file{comton} and @file{bugs}.  @file{elmer} is the gateway machine for
which I will show the configuration file.  @file{elmer} calls out to
@file{uupsi}.  As an additional complication, @file{uupsi} knows
@file{elmer} as @file{airs}; this will show how a machine can have one
name on an internal network but a different name to the external world.
@file{elmer} has two modems.  It also has an TCP/IP connection to
@file{uupsi}, but since that is supposed to be reserved for interactive
work (it is, perhaps, only a 9600 baud SLIP line) it will only use it if
the modems are not available.

A network this small would normally use a single @file{sys} file.
However, for pedagogical purposes I will show two separate @file{sys}
files, one for the local systems and one for @file{uupsi}.  This is done
with the @code{sysfile} command in the @file{config} file.  Here is the
@file{config} file.

@example
# This is config
# The local sys file
sysfile /usr/local/lib/uucp/sys.local
# The remote sys file
sysfile /usr/local/lib/uucp/sys.remote
@end example

Using the defaults feature of the @file{sys} file can greatly simplify
the listing of local systems.  Here is @file{sys.local}.  Note that this
assumes that the local systems are trusted; they are permited to request
any world readable file and to write files into any world writable
directory.

@example
# This is sys.local
# Get the login name and password to use from the call-out file
call-login *
call-password *

# The systems must use a particular login
called-login Ulocal

# Permit sending any world readable file
local-send /
remote-send /

# Permit requesting into any world writable directory
local-receive /
remote-receive /

# Call at any time
time any

# Use port1, then port2
port port1

alternate

port port2

# Now define the systems themselves.  Because of all the defaults we
# used, there is very little to specify for the systems themselves.

system comton
phone 5551212

system bugs
phone 5552424
@end example

The @file{sys.remote} file describes the @file{uupsi} connection.  The
@code{myname} command is used to change the UUCP name to @file{airs}
when talking to @file{uupsi}.

@example
# This is sys.remote
# Define uupsi
system uupsi

# The login name and password are in the call-out file
call-login *
call-password *

# We can call out at any time
time any

# uupsi uses a special login name
called-login Uuupsi

# uuspi thinks of us as `airs'
myname airs

# The phone number
phone 5554848

# We use port2 first, then port1, then TCP

port port2

alternate

port port1

alternate

# We don't bother to make a special entry in the port file for TCP, we
# just describe the entire port right here.  We use a special chat
# script over TCP because the usual one confuses some TCP servers.
port type TCP
address uu.psi.com
chat ogin: \L word: \P
@end example

The ports are defined in the file @file{port} (@pxref{port file}).  For
this example they are both connected to the same type of 2400 baud
Hayes-compatible modem.

@example
# This is port

port port1
type modem
device /dev/ttyd0
dialer hayes
speed 2400

port port2
type modem
device /dev/ttyd1
dialer hayes
speed 2400
@end example

Dialers are described in the @file{dial} file (@pxref{dial file}).

@example
# This is dial

dialer hayes

# The chat script used to dial the phone.  \D is the phone number.
chat "" ATZ\r\d\c OK ATDT\D CONNECT

# If we get BUSY or NO CARRIER we abort the dial immediately
chat-fail BUSY
chat-fail NO\sCARRIER

# When the call is over we make sure we hangup the modem.
complete \d\d+++\d\dATH\r\c
abort \d\d+++\d\dATH\r\c
@end example

@node Time Strings, Chat Scripts, Configuration Examples, Configuration Files
@section Time Strings
@cindex time strings

Several commands use time strings to specify a range of times.  This
section describes how to write time strings.

A time string may be a list of simple time strings separated with a
vertical bar @kbd{|} or a command @kbd{,}.

Each simple time string must begin with @samp{Su}, @samp{Mo}, @samp{Tu},
@samp{We}, @samp{Th}, @samp{Fr}, or @samp{Sa}, or @samp{Wk} for any
weekday, or @samp{Any} for any day.

Following the day may be a range of hours separated with a hyphen using
24 hour time.  The range of hours may cross 0; for example
@samp{2300-0700} means any time except 7 AM to 11 PM.  If no time is
given, calls may be made at any time on the specified day(s).  

The time string may also consist of the single word @samp{Never}, which
does not match any time, or a single word with a name defined in a
previous @code{timetable} command (@pxref{Miscellaneous (sys)}).

Here are a few sample time strings with an explanation of what they
mean.

@table @samp

@item Wk2305-0855,Sa,Su2305-1655

This means weekdays before 8:55 AM or after 11:05 PM, any time Saturday,
or Sunday before 4:55 PM or after 11:05 PM.  These are approximately the
times during which night rates apply to phone calls in the U.S.A.  Note
that this time string uses, for example, @samp{2305} rather than
@samp{2300}; this will ensure a cheap rate phone call even if the
computer clock is running up to five minutes ahead of the real time.

@item Wk0905-2255,Su1705-2255

This means weekdays from 9:05 AM to 10:55 PM, or Sunday from 5:05 PM to
10:55 PM.  This is approximately the opposite of the previous example.

@item Any

Since no time is specified, this means any time on any day.

@end table

@node Chat Scripts, config File, Time Strings, Configuration Files
@section Chat Scripts
@cindex chat scripts

Chat scripts are used in several different places, such as dialing out
on modems or logging in to remote systems.  Chat scripts are made up of
pairs of strings.  The program waits until it sees the first string,
known as the @dfn{expect} string, and then sends out the second string,
the @dfn{send} string.

Each chat script is defined using a set of commands.  These commands
always end in a string beginning with @code{chat}, but may start with
different strings.  For example, in the @file{sys} file there is one set
of commands beginning with @code{chat} and another set beginning with
@code{called-chat}.  The prefixes are only used to disambiguate
different types of chat scripts, and this section ignores the prefixes
when describing the commands.

@table @code

@item chat @var{strings}
@findex chat

Specify a chat script.  The arguments to the @code{chat} command are
pairs of strings separated by whitespace.  The first string of each pair
is an expect string, the second is a send string.  The program will wait
for the expect string to appear; when it does, the program will send the
send string.  If the expect string does not appear within a certain
number of seconds (as set by the @code{chat-timeout} command) the chat
script fails and, typically, the call is aborted.  If the final expect
string is seen (and the optional final send string has been sent), the
chat script is successful.

An expect string may contain additional subsend and subexpect strings,
separated by hyphens.  If the expect string is not seen, the subsend
string is sent and the chat script continues by waiting for the
subexpect string.  This means that a hyphen may not appear in an expect
string; use @samp{\055} instead.

An expect string may simply be @samp{""}, meaning to skip the expect
phase.  Otherwise, the following escape characters may appear in expect
strings:

@table @samp
@item \b
a backspace character
@item \n
a newline or line feed character
@item \N
a null character (for BNU compatibility)
@item \r
a carriage return character
@item \s
a space character
@item \t
a tab character
@item \\
a backslash character
@item \@var{ddd}
character @var{ddd}, where @var{ddd} are up to three octal digits
@item \x@var{ddd}
character @var{ddd}, where @var{ddd} are hexadecimal digits.
@end table

As in C, there may be up to three octal digits following a backslash,
but the hexadecimal escape sequence continues as far as possible.  To
follow a hexadecimal escape sequence with a hex digit, interpose a send
string of @samp{""}.

A send string may also simply be @samp{""} to skip the send phase.
Otherwise, all of the escape characters legal for expect strings may be
used, and the following escape characters are also permitted:

@table @samp
@item EOT
send an end of transmission character (@kbd{^D})
@item BREAK
send a break character (may not work on all systems)
@item \c
suppress trailing carriage return at end of send string
@item \d
delay sending for 1 second
@item \e
disable echo checking
@item \E
enable echo checking (wait for echo before continuing)
@item \K
same as @kbd{BREAK} (for BNU compatibility)
@item \p
pause sending for a fraction of a second
@end table

Some specific types of chat scripts also define additional escape
sequences that may appear in the send string.  For example, the login
chat script defines @samp{\L} and @samp{\P} to send the login name and
password, respectively.

A carriage return will be sent at the end of each send string, unless
the @kbd{\c} escape sequence appears in the string.  Note that some UUCP
packages use @kbd{\b} for break, but here it means backspace.

Echo checking means that after writing each character the program will
wait until the character is echoed.  Echo checking must be turned on
separately for each send string for which it is desired; it will be
turned on for characters following @kbd{\E} and turned off for characters
following @kbd{\e}.

@item chat-timeout @var{number}
@findex chat-timeout

The number of seconds to wait for an expect string in the chat script
before timing out and sending the next subsend or failing the chat
script entirely.  The default value is 10 for a login chat or 60 for
any other type of chat.

@item chat-fail @var{string}
@findex chat-fail

If the @var{string} is seen at any time during a chat script, the chat
script is aborted.  The string may not contain any whitespace
characters; escape sequences must be used for them.  Multiple
@code{chat-fail} commands may appear in a single chat script.  The
default is to have none.

This permits a chat script to be quickly aborted if an error string is
seen.  For example, a script used to dial out on a modem might use the
command @samp{chat-fail BUSY} to stop the chat script immediately if the
string @samp{BUSY} was seen.

@item chat-seven-bit @var{boolean}
@findex chat-seven-bit

If the argument is true, all incoming characters are stripped to seven
bits when being compared to the expect string.  Otherwise all eight bits
are used in the comparison.  The default is true because some Unix
systems generate parity bits during the login prompt which must be
ignored while running a chat script.  This has no effect on any
@code{chat-program}, which must ignore parity by itself if necessary.

@item chat-program @var{strings}
@findex chat-program in sys file

Specify a program to run before executing the chat script.  This program
could run its own version of a chat script, or it could do whatever it
wants.  If both @code{chat-program} and @code{chat} are specified, the
program is executed first followed by the chat script.

The first argument to the @code{chat-program} command is the program
name to run.  The remaining arguments are passed to the program.  The
following escape sequences are recognized in the arguments:

@table @kbd
@item \Y
port device name
@item \S
port speed
@item \\
backslash
@end table

Some specific uses of @code{chat-program} define additional escape
sequences.

Arguments other than escape sequences are passed exactly as they appear
in the configuration file, except that sequences of whitespace are
compressed to a single space character; this exception may be removed in
the future.

If the @code{chat-program} command is not used, no program is run.

On Unix, the standard input and standard output of the program will be
attached to the port in use.  Anything the program writes to standard
error will be written to the UUCP log file.  No other file descriptors
will be open.  If the program does not exit with a status of 0, it will
be assumed to have failed; this means that the dialing programs used by
some versions of BNU may not be used directly, although of course a
shell script could be used as an interface.

The program will be run as the @code{uucp} user, and the environment
will be that of the process that started @code{uucico}, so care must be
taken to maintain security.

No search path is used to find the program; a full path name must be
given.  If the program is an executable shell script, it will be passed
to @file{/bin/sh} even on systems which are unable to execute shell
scripts.  It is also easy to invoke @file{/bin/sh} directly.

@end table

Here is a simple example of a chat script that might be used to reset a
Hayes compatible modem.

@example
chat "" ATZ OK-ATZ-OK
@end example

The first expect string is @samp{""}, so it is ignored.  The chat script
then sends @samp{ATZ}.  If the modem responds with @samp{OK}, the chat
script finishes.  If 60 seconds (the default timeout) pass before seeing
@samp{OK}, the chat script sends another @samp{ATZ}.  If it then sees
@samp{OK}, the chat script succeeds.  Otherwise, the chat script fails.

For a more complex chat script example, see @ref{Logging In}.

@node config File, sys File, Chat Scripts, Configuration Files
@section The Main Configuration File
@cindex config file
@cindex main configuration file
@cindex configuration file (config)

The main configuration file is named @file{config}.

Since all the values that may be specified in the main configuration
file also have defaults, there need not be a main configuration file at
all.

@menu
* Miscellaneous (config)::      Miscellaneous config file commands
* Configuration File Names::    Using different configuration files
* Log File Names::              Using different log files
* Debugging Levels::            Debugging levels
@end menu

@node Miscellaneous (config), Configuration File Names, config File, config File
@subsection Miscellaneous config File Commands

@table @code

@item nodename @var{string}
@findex nodename
@itemx hostname @var{string}
@findex hostname
@itemx uuname @var{string}
@findex uuname
@cindex UUCP system name
@cindex system name

These keywords are equivalent.  They specify the UUCP name of the
local host.  If there is no configuration file, an appropriate
function will be used to get the host name, if possible.

@item spool @var{string}
@findex spool
@cindex spool directory
@cindex /usr/spool/uucp

Specify the spool directory.  The default is from @file{policy.h}.
Command files, work files, temporary files, etc., are stored in this
directory and in subdirectories of it.

@item pubdir @var{string}
@findex pubdir in config file
@cindex public directory
@cindex uucppublic
@cindex /usr/spool/uucppublic

Specify the public directory.  The default is from @file{policy.h}.  On
Unix, when a file is named using a leading @kbd{~/}, it is taken from or
to the public directory.  Each system may use a separate public
directory by using the @code{pubdir} command in the system configuration
file; see @ref{Miscellaneous (sys)}.

@item unknown @var{string} @dots{}
@findex unknown
@cindex unknown systems

The @var{string} and subsequent arguments are treated as though they
appeared in the system file (@pxref{sys file}).  They are used to apply
to any unknown systems that may call in, probably to set file transfer
permissions and the like.  If the @code{unknown} command is not used,
unknown systems are not permitted to call in.

@item max-uuxqts @var{number}
@findex max-uuxqts

Specify the maximum number of @code{uuxqt} processes which may run at
the same time.  Having several @code{uuxqt} processes running at once
can significantly slow down a system, but since @code{uuxqt} is
automatically started by @code{uucico}, it can happen quite easily.  The
default for @code{max-uuxqts} is 0, which means that there is no limit.
If BNU configuration files are being read and the code was compiled
without @code{HAVE_TAYLOR_CONFIG}, then if the file @file{Maxuuxqts} in
the configuration directory contains a readable number it will be used as
the value for @code{max-uuxqts}.

@item v2-files @var{boolean}
@findex v2-files

If the code was compiled to be able to read V2 configuration files, a
false argument to this command will prevent them from being read.
This can be useful while testing.  The default is true.

@item bnu-files @var{boolean}
@findex bnu-files

If the code was compiled to be able to read BNU configuration files, a
false argument to this command will prevent them from being read.
This can be useful while testing.  The default is true.

@end table

@node Configuration File Names, Log File Names, Miscellaneous (config), config File
@subsection Configuration File Names

@table @code

@item sysfile @var{strings}
@findex sysfile

Specify the system file(s).  The default is the file @file{sys} in the
directory @var{newconfigdir}.  These files hold information about other
systems with which this system communicates; see @ref{sys file}.
Multiple system files may be given on the line, and the @code{sysfile}
command may be repeated; each system file has its own set of defaults.

@item portfile @var{strings}
@findex portfile

Specify the port file(s).  The default is the file @file{port} in the
directory @var{newconfigdir}.  These files describe ports which are used
to call other systems and accept calls from other systems; see @ref{port
file}.  No port files need be named at all.  Multiple port files may be
given on the line, and the @code{portfile} command may be repeated.

@item dialfile @var{strings}
@findex dialfile

Specify the dial file(s).  The default is the file @file{dial} in the
directory @var{newconfigdir}.  These files describe dialing devices
(modems); @xref{dial file}.  No dial files need be named at all.
Multiple dial files may be given on the line, and the @code{dialfile}
command may be repeated.

@item dialcodefile @var{strings}
@findex dialcodefile
@cindex configuration file (dialcode)
@cindex dialcode file
@cindex dialcode configuration file

Specify the dialcode file(s).  The default is the file @file{dialcode}
in the directory @var{newconfigdir}.  These files specify dialcodes that
may be used when sending phone numbers to a modem.  This permits using
the same set of phone numbers in different area-codes or with different
phone systems, by using dialcodes to specify the calling sequence.  When
a phone number goes through dialcode translation, the leading alphabetic
characters are stripped off.  The dialcode files are read line by line,
just like any other configuration file, and when a line is found whose
first word is the same as the leading characters from the phone number,
the second word on the line (which would normally consist of numbers)
replaces the dialcode in the phone number.  No dialcode file need be
used.  Multiple dialcode files may be specified on the line, and the
@code{dialcodefile} command may be repeated; all the dialcode files will
be read in turn until a dialcode is located.

@item callfile @var{strings}
@findex callfile
@cindex call out file
@cindex call configuration file
@cindex call out login name
@cindex call out password
@cindex configuration file (call)

Specify the call out login name and password file(s).  The default is
the file @file{call} in the directory @var{newconfigdir}.  If the call
out login name or password for a system are given as @kbd{*}
(@pxref{Logging In}), these files are read to get the real login name or
password.  Each line in the file(s) has three words: the system name,
the login name, and the password.  This file is only used when placing
calls to remote systems; the password file described under
@code{passwdfile} below is used for incoming calls.  The intention of
the call out file is to permit the system file to be publically
readable; the call out files must obviously be kept secure.  These files
need not be used.  Multiple call out files may be specified on the line,
and the @code{callfile} command may be repeated; all the files will be
read in turn until the system is found.

@item passwdfile @var{strings}
@findex passwdfile
@cindex passwd file
@cindex passwd configuration file
@cindex configuration file (passwd)
@cindex call in login name
@cindex call in password

Specify the password file(s) to use for login names when @code{uucico}
is doing its own login prompting, which it does when given the
@samp{-e}, @samp{-l} or @samp{-w} switch.  The default is the file
@file{passwd} in the directory @var{newconfigdir}.  Each line in the
file(s) has two words: the login name and the password (e.g. @code{Ufoo
foopas}).  The login name is accepted before the system name is known,
so these are independent of which system is calling in; a particular
login may be required for a system by using the @code{called-login}
command in the system file (@pxref{Accepting a Call}).  These password
files are optional, although one must exist if @code{uucico} is to
present its own login prompts.  Multiple password files may be specified
on the line, and the @code{passwdfile} command may be repeated; all the
files will be read in turn until the login name is found.

@end table

@node Log File Names, Debugging Levels, Configuration File Names, config File
@subsection Log File Names

@table @code

@item logfile @var{string}
@findex logfile
@cindex log file

Name the log file.  The default is from @file{policy.h}.  Logging
information is written to this file.  If @code{HAVE_BNU_LOGGING} is
defined in @file{conf.h}, then by default a separate log file is used
for each system.  Using this command to name a log file will cause all
the systems to use it.

@item statfile @var{string}
@findex statfile
@cindex statistics file

Name the statistics file.  The default is from @file{policy.h}.
Statistical information about file transfers is written to this file.

@item debugfile @var{string}
@findex debugfile
@cindex debugging file

Name the file to which debugging information is written.  The default is
from @file{policy.h}.  This command is only effective if the code has
been compiled to include debugging (this is controlled by the
@code{DEBUG} variable in @file{policy.h}).  After the first debugging
message has been written, messages written to the log file are also
written to the debugging file to make it easier to keep the order of
actions straight.  The debugging file is different from the log file
because information such as passwords can appear in it, so it must be
not be publically readable.

@end table

@node Debugging Levels,  , Log File Names, config File
@subsection Debugging Levels

@table @code

@item debug @var{string} @dots{}
@findex debug in config file

Set the debugging level.  This command is only effective if the code has
been compiled to include debugging.  The default is to have no
debugging.  The arguments are strings which name the types of debugging
to be turned on.  The following types of debugging are defined:

@table @samp
@item abnormal
Output debugging messages for abnormal situations, such as recoverable errors.
@item chat
Output debugging messages for chat scripts.
@item handshake
Output debugging messages for the initial handshake.
@item uucp-proto
Output debugging messages for the UUCP protocol itself.
@item proto
Output debugging messages for the individual protocols.
@item port
Output debugging messages for actions on the communication port.
@item config
Output debugging messages while reading the configuration files.
@item spooldir
Output debugging messages for actions in the spool directory.
@item execute
Output debugging messages whenever another program is executed.
@item incoming
List all incoming data in the debugging file.
@item outgoing
List all outgoing data in the debugging file.
@item all
All of the above.
@end table

The debugging level may also be specified as a number.  A 1 will set
@samp{chat} debugging, a 2 will set both @samp{chat} and
@samp{handshake} debugging, and so on down the possibilities.  Currently
an 11 will turn on all possible debugging, since there are 11 types of
debugging messages listed above; more debugging types may be added in
the future.  The @code{debug} command may be used several times in the
configuration file; every debugging type named will be turned on.  When
running any of the programs, the @samp{-x} switch (actually, for
@code{uulog} it's the @samp{-X} switch) may be used to turn on
debugging.  The argument to the @samp{-x} switch is one of the strings
listed above, or a number as described above, or a comma separated list
of strings (e.g.  @samp{-x chat,handshake}).  The @samp{-x} switch may
also appear several times on the command line, in which case all named
debugging types will be turned on.  The @samp{-x} debugging is in
addition to any debugging specified by the @code{debug} command; there
is no way to cancel debugging information.  The debugging level may also
be set specifically for calls to or from a specific system with the
@code{debug} command in the system file (@pxref{Miscellaneous (sys)}).

The debugging messages are somewhat idiosyncratic; it may be necessary
to refer to the source code for additional information in some cases.

@end table

@node sys File, port File, config File, Configuration Files
@section The System Configuration File
@cindex sys file
@cindex system configuration file
@cindex configuration file (sys) 

By default there is a single system configuration, named @file{sys} in
the directory @var{newconfigdir}.  This may be overridden by the
@code{sysfile} command in the main configuration file; see
@ref{Configuration File Names}.

These files describe all remote systems known to the UUCP package.

@menu
* Defaults and Alternates::     Using defaults and alternates
* Naming the System::           Naming the system
* Calling Out::                 Calling out
* Accepting a Call::            Accepting a call
* Protocol Selection::          Protocol selection
* File Transfer Control::       File transfer control
* Miscellaneous (sys)::         Miscellaneous sys file commands
* Default sys File Values::     Default values
@end menu

@node Defaults and Alternates, Naming the System, sys File, sys File
@subsection Defaults and Alternates

The first set of commands in the file, up to the first @code{system}
command, specify defaults to be used for all systems in that file.  Each
system file uses a different set of defaults.

Subsequently, each set of commands from @code{system} up to the next
@code{system} command describe a particular system.  Default values may
be overridden for specific systems.

Each system may then have a series of alternate choices to use when
calling out or calling in.  The first set of commands for a particular
system, up to the first @code{alternate} command, provide the first
choice.  Subsequently, each set of commands from @code{alternate} up to
the next @code{alternate} command describe an alternate choice for
calling out or calling in.

When a system is called, the commands before the first @code{alternate}
are used to select a phone number, port, and so forth; if the call fails
for some reason, the commands between the first @code{alternate} and the
second are used, and so forth.  Well, not quite.  Actually, each
succeeding alternate will only be used if it is different in some
relevant way (different phone number, different chat script, etc.).  If
you want to force the same alternate to be used again (to retry a phone
call more than once, for example), enter the phone number (or any other
relevant field) again to make it appear different.

The alternates can also be used to give different permissions to an
incoming call based on the login name.  This will only be done if the
first set of commands, before the first @code{alternate} command, uses
the @code{called-login} command.  The list of alternates will be
searched, and the first alternate with a matching @code{called-login}
command will be used.  If no alternates match, the call will be
rejected.

The @code{alternate} command may also be used in the file-wide defaults
(the set of commands before the first @code{system} command).  This
might be used to specify a list of ports which are available for all
systems (for an example of this, see @ref{Gateway Example}) or to
specify permissions based on the login name used by the remote system
when it calls in.  The first alternate for each system will default to
the first alternate for the file-wide defaults (as modified by the
commands used before the first @code{alternate} command for this
system), the second alternate for each system to the second alternate
for the file-wide defaults (as modified the same way), and so forth.  If
a system specifies more alternates than the file-wide defaults, the
trailing ones will default to the last file-wide default alternate.  If
a system specifies fewer alternates than the file-wide defaults, the
trailing file-wide default alternates will be used unmodified.  The
@code{default-alternates} command may be used to modify this behaviour.

This can all get rather confusing, although it's easier to use than to
describe concisely; the @code{uuchk} program may be used to ensure that
you are getting what you want.

@node Naming the System, Calling Out, Defaults and Alternates, sys File
@subsection Naming the System

@table @code

@item system @var{string}
@findex system

Specify the remote system name.  Subsequent commands up to the next
@code{system} command refer to this system.

@item alternate [@var{string}]
@findex alternate

Start an alternate set of commands (@pxref{Defaults and Alternates}).
An optional argument may be used to name the alternate.  This name will
be put in the log file if the alternate is used to call the system.
There is no way to name the first alternate (the commands before the
first @code{alternate} command).

@item default-alternates @var{boolean}
@findex default-alternates

If the argument is false, any remaining default alternates (from the
defaults specified at the top of the current system file) will not be
used.  The default is true.

@item alias @var{string}
@findex alias

Specify an alias for the current system.  The alias may be used by local
@code{uucp} and @code{uux} commands.  The default is to have no aliases.

@item myname @var{string}
@findex myname

Specifies a different system name to use when calling the remote system.
Also, if @code{called-login} is used and is not @samp{ANY}, then, when a
system logs in with that login name, @var{string} is used as the system
name.  Because the local system name must be determined before the
remote system has identified itself, using @code{myname} and
@code{called-login} together for any system will set the local name for
that login; this means that each locally used system name must have a
unique login name associated with it.  This allows a system to have
different names for an external and an internal network.  The default is
to not use a special local name.

@end table

@node Calling Out, Accepting a Call, Naming the System, sys File
@subsection Calling Out

This section describes commands used when placing a call to another
system.

@menu
* When to Call::                When to call
* Placing the Call::            Placing the call
* Logging In::                  Logging in
@end menu

@node When to Call, Placing the Call, Calling Out, Calling Out
@subsubsection When to Call

@table @code

@item time @var{string} [@var{number}]
@findex time

Specify when the system may be called.  The first argument is a time
string; see @ref{Time Strings}.  The optional second argument specifies
a retry time in minutes.  If a call made during a time that matches the
time string fails, no more calls are permitted until the retry time has
passed.  By default an exponentially increasing retry time is used:
after each failure the next retry period is longer.  A retry time
specified in the @code{time} command is always a fixed amount of time.

The @code{time} command may appear multiple times in a single alternate,
in which case if any time string matches the system may be called.  The
default time string is @samp{Never}.

@item timegrade @var{character} @var{string} [@var{number}]
@findex timegrade

The @var{character} specifies a grade.  It must be a single letter or
digit.  The @var{string} is a time string (@pxref{Time Strings}).  All
jobs of grade @var{character} or higher (where @kbd{0} > @kbd{9} >
@kbd{A} > @kbd{Z} > @kbd{a} > @kbd{z}) may be run at the specified time.
An ordinary @code{time} command is equivalent to using @code{timegrade}
with a grade of @kbd{z}, permitting all jobs.  If there are no jobs of a
sufficiently high grade according to the time string, the system will
not be called.  Giving the @samp{-s} switch to @code{uucico} to force it
to call a system causes it to assume there is a job of grade @kbd{0}
waiting to be run.

The optional third argument specifies a retry time in minutes.  See the
@code{time} command, above, for more details.

Note that the @code{timegrade} command serves two purposes: 1) if there
is no job of sufficiently high grade the system will not be called, and
2) if the system is called anyway (because the @samp{-s} switch was
given to @code{uucico}) only jobs of sufficiently high grade will be
transferred.  However, if the other system calls in, the
@code{timegrade} commands are ignored, and jobs of any grade may be
transferred (but see @code{call-timegrade} below).  Also, the
@code{timegrade} command will not prevent the other system from
transferring any job it chooses, regardless of who placed the call.

The @code{timegrade} command may appear multiple times without using
@code{alternate}.  If this command does not appear, there are no
restrictions on what grade of work may be done at what time.

@item call-timegrade @var{character} @var{string}
@findex call-timegrade

The @var{character} is a single character @kbd{A} to @kbd{Z}, @kbd{a} to
@kbd{z}, or @kbd{0} to @kbd{9} and specifies a grade.  The @var{string}
is a time string as described under the @code{time} command.  If a call
is placed to the other system during a time which matches the time
string, the remote system will be requested to only run jobs of grade
@var{character} or higher.  Unfortunately, there is no way to guarantee
that the other system will obey the request (this UUCP package will, but
there are others which will not); moreover job grades are historically
somewhat arbitrary, so specifying a grade will only be meaningful if the
other system cooperates in assigning grades.  This grade restriction
only applies when the other system is called, not when the other system
calls in.

The @code{call-timegrade} command may appear multiple times without
using @code{alternate}.  If this command does not appear, or if none of
the time strings match, the remote system will be allowed to send
whatever grades of work it chooses.

@end table

@node Placing the Call, Logging In, When to Call, Calling Out
@subsubsection Placing the Call

@table @code

@item baud @var{number}
@findex baud in sys file
@itemx speed @var{number}
@findex speed in sys file

Specify the speed (the term @dfn{baud} is technically incorrect, but
widely understood) at which to call the system.  This will try all
available ports with that baud rate until an unlocked port is found.
The ports are defined in the port file.  If both @code{baud} and
@code{port} commands appear, both are used when selecting a port.  To
allow calls at more than one baud rate, the @code{alternate} command
must be used (@pxref{Defaults and Alternates}).  If this command does
not appear, there is no default; the baud rate may be specified in the
port file, but if it is not then the natural baud rate of the port will
be used (whatever that means on the system).  Specifying an explicit
baud rate of 0 will request the natural baud rate of the port,
overriding any default baud rate from the defaults at the top of the
file.

@item port @var{string}
@findex port in sys file

Name a particular port or type of port to use when calling the system.
The information for this port is obtained from the port file.  If this
command does not appear, there is no default; a port must somehow be
specified in order to call out (it may be specified implicitly using the
@code{baud} command or explicitly using the next version of
@code{port}).  There may be many ports with the same name; each will be
tried in turn until an unlocked one is found which matches the desired
baud rate.

@item port @var{string} @dots{}

If more than one string follows the @code{port} command, the subsequent
strings are treated as commands that might appear in the port file
(@pxref{port file}).  If a port is named (by using a single string
following @code{port}) these commands are ignored; their purpose is to
permit defining the port completely in the system file rather than
always requiring entries in two different files.  In order to call out,
a port must be specified using some version of the @code{port} command,
or by using the @code{baud} command to select ports from the port file.

@item phone @var{string}
@findex phone
@itemx address @var{string}
@findex address

Give a phone number to call (when using a modem port) or a remote host
to contact (when using a TCP port).  The commands @code{phone} and
@code{address} are equivalent, but are intended to be more mnemonic
depending on the type of port in use.

When used with a modem port, an @kbd{=} character in the phone number
means to wait for a secondary dial tone (although only some modems
support this); a @kbd{-} character means to pause while dialing for 1
second (again, only some modems support this).  If the system has more
than one phone number, each one must appear in a different alternate.
The @code{phone} command must appear in order to call out on a modem;
there is no default.

When used with a TCP port, the string names the host to contact.  It may
be a domain name or a numeric Internet address.  If no address is
specified, the system name is used.

When used with a port that neither is a modem nor TCP, this command is
ignored.

@end table

@node Logging In,  , Placing the Call, Calling Out
@subsubsection Logging In
@table @code

@item chat @var{strings}
@findex chat in sys file
@item chat-timeout @var{number}
@findex chat-timeout in sys file
@item chat-fail @var{string}
@findex chat-fail in sys file
@item chat-seven-bit @var{boolean}
@findex chat-seven-bit in sys file
@item chat-program @var{strings}
@findex chat-program in sys file

These commands describe a chat script to use when logging on to a remote
system.  Chat scripts are explained in @ref{Chat Scripts}.

Two additional escape sequences may be used in send strings.

@table @samp
@item \L
Send the login name, as set by the @code{call-login} command.
@item \P
Send the passowrd, as set by the @code{call-password} command.
@end table

Three additional escape sequences may be used with the
@code{chat-program} command.  These are @samp{\L} and @samp{\P}, which
become the login name and password, respectively, and @samp{\Z}, which
becomes the name of the system of being called.

The default chat script is:

@example
chat "" \r\c ogin:-BREAK-ogin:-BREAK-ogin: \L word: \P
@end example

This will send a carriage return (the @kbd{\c} suppresses the additional
trailing carriage return that would otherwise be sent) and waits for the
string @samp{ogin:} (which would be the last part of the @samp{login:}
prompt supplied by a Unix system).  If it doesn't see @samp{ogin:}, it
sends a break and waits for @samp{ogin:} again.  If it still doesn't see
@samp{ogin:}, it sends another break and waits for @samp{ogin:} again.
If it still doesn't see @samp{ogin:}, the chat script aborts and hangs
up the phone.  If it does see @samp{ogin:} at some point, it sends the
login name (as specified by the @code{call-login} command) followed by a
carriage return (since all send strings are followed by a carriage
return unless @kbd{\c} is used) and waits for the string @samp{word:}
(which would be the last part of the @samp{Password:} prompt supplied by
a Unix system).  If it sees @samp{word:}, it sends the password and a
carriage return, completing the chat script.  The program will then
enter the handshake phase of the UUCP protocol.

This chat script will work for most systems, so you will only be
required to use the @code{call-login} and @code{call-password} commands.
In fact, in the file-wide defaults you could set defaults of
@samp{call-login *} and @samp{call-password *}; you would then just have
to make an entry for each system in the call-out login file.

Some systems seem to flush input after the @samp{login:} prompt, so they
may need a version of this chat script with a @kbd{\d} before the
@kbd{\L}.  When using UUCP over TCP, some servers will not be handle the
initial carriage return sent by this chat script; in this case you may
have to specify the simple chat script @samp{ogin: \L word: \P}.

@item call-login @var{string}
@findex call-login

Specify the login name to send with @kbd{\L} in the chat script.  If the
string is @samp{*} (e.g. @samp{call-login *}) the login name will be
fetched from the call out login name and password file
(@pxref{Configuration File Names}).  There is no default.

@item call-password @var{string}
@findex call-password

Specify the password to send with @kbd{\P} in the chat script.  If the
string is @samp{*} (e.g. @samp{call-password *}) the password will be
fetched from the call-out login name and password file
(@pxref{Configuration File Names}).  There is no default.

@end table

@node Accepting a Call, Protocol Selection, Calling Out, sys File
@subsection Accepting a Call

@table @code

@item called-login @var{strings}
@findex called-login

The first @var{string} specifies the login name that the system must use
when calling in.  If it is @samp{ANY} (e.g. @samp{called-login ANY}) any
login name may be used; this is useful to override a file-wide default
and to indicate that future alternates may have different login names.
Case is significant.  The default value is @samp{ANY}.  

Different alternates (@pxref{Defaults and Alternates}) may use different
@code{called-login} commands, in which case the login name will be used
to select which alternate is in effect; this will only work if the first
alternate (before the first @code{alternate} command) uses the
@code{called-login} command.

Additional strings may be specified after the login name; they are a
list of which systems are permitted to use this login name.  If this
feature is used, then normally the login name will only be given in a
single @code{called-login} command.  Only systems which appear on the
list, or which use an explicit @code{called-login} command, will be
permitted to use that login name.  If the same login name is used more
than once with a list of systems, all the lists are concatenated
together.  This feature permits you to restrict a login name to a
particular set of systems without requiring you to use the
@code{called-login} command for every single system; you can achieve a
similar effect by using a different system file for each permitted login
name with an appropriate @code{called-login} command in the file-wide
defaults.

@item callback @var{boolean}
@findex callback

If @var{boolean} is true, then when the remote system calls
@code{uucico} will hang up the connection and prepare to call it back.
This is false by default.

@item called-chat @var{strings}
@findex called-chat
@item called-chat-timeout @var{number}
@findex called-chat-timeout
@item called-chat-fail @var{string}
@findex called-chat-fail
@item called-chat-seven-bit @var{boolean}
@findex called-chat-seven-bit
@item called-chat-program @var{strings}
@findex called-chat-program
  
These commands may be used to define a chat script (@pxref{Chat
Scripts}) that is run whenever the local system is called by the system
being defined.  The chat script defined by the @code{chat} command
(@pxref{Logging In}), on the other hand, is used when the remote system
is called.  This called chat script might be used to set special modem
parameters that are appropriate to a particular system.  It is run after
protocol negotiation is complete, but before the protocol has been
started.  See @ref{Logging In} for additional escape sequence which may
be used besides those defined for all chat scripts.  There is no default
called chat script.  If the called chat script fails, the incoming call
will be aborted.

@end table

@node Protocol Selection, File Transfer Control, Accepting a Call, sys File
@subsection Protocol Selection

@table @code

@item protocol @var{string}
@findex protocol in sys file

Specifies which protocols to use for the other system, and in which
order to use them.  This would not normally be used.  For example,
@samp{protocol tfg}.

The default depends on the characteristics of the port and the dialer,
as specified by the @code{seven-bit} and @code{reliable} commands.  If
neither the port nor the dialer use either of these commands, the
default is to assume an eight-bit reliable connection.  The commands
@samp{seven-bit true} or @samp{reliable false} might be used in either
the port or the dialer to change this.  Each protocol has particular
requirements that must be met before it will be considered during
negotiation with the remote side.

The @samp{t} and @samp{e} protocols are intended for use over TCP or
some other communication path with end to end reliability, as they do no
checking of the data at all.  They will only be considered on a TCP port
which is both reliable and eight bit.

The @samp{g} protocol is robust, but requires an eight-bit connection.

The @samp{f} protocol is intended for use with X.25 connections; it
checksums each file as a whole, so any error causes the entire file to
be retransmitted.  It requires a reliable connection, but only uses
seven-bit transmissions.  It is a streaming protocol, so, while it can
be used on a serial port, the port must be completely reliable and flow
controlled; many aren't.

The protocols will be considered in the order shown above.  This means
that if neither the @code{seven-bit} nor the @code{reliable} command are
used, the @samp{t} protocol will be used over a TCP connection and the
@samp{g} protocol will be used over any other type of connection
(subject, of course, to what is supported by the remote system; it may
be assumed that all systems support the @samp{g} protocol).

Note that currently specifying both @samp{seven-bit true} and
@samp{reliable false} will not match any protocol.  If this occurs
through a combination of port and dialer specifications, you will have
to use the @code{protocol} command for the system or no protocol will be
selected at all (the only reasonable choice would be @samp{protocol f}).

A protocol list may also be specified for a port (@pxref{port file}),
but if there is a list for the system the list for the port is ignored.

@item protocol-parameter @var{character} @var{string} @dots{}
@findex protocol-parameter in sys file

@var{character} is a single character specifying a protocol.  The
remaining strings are a command specific to that protocol which will be
executed if that protocol is used.  A typical command is something like
@samp{window 7}.  The particular commands are protocol specific.

The @samp{g} protocol supports the following commands, all of which take
numeric arguments:

@table @code
@item window
The window size to request the remote system to use.  This must be
between 1 and 7 inclusive.  The default is 7.
@item packet-size
The packet size to request the remote system to use.  This must be a
power of 2 between 32 and 4096 inclusive.  The default is 64, which is
the only packet size supported by many older UUCP packages.  Some UUCP
packages will even dump core if a larger packet size is requested.
@item startup-retries
The number of times to retry the initialization sequence.  The default
is 8.
@item init-retries
The number of times to retry one phase of the initialization sequence
(there are three phases).  The default is 4.
@item init-timeout
The timeout in seconds for one phase of the initialization sequence.  The
default is 10.
@item retries
The number of times to retry sending either a data packet or a request
for the next packet.  The default is 6.
@item timeout
The timeout in seconds when waiting for either a data packet or an
acknowledgement.  The default is 10.
@item garbage
The number of unrecognized bytes to permit before dropping the
connection.  This must be larger than the packet size.  The default is
10000.
@item errors
The number of errors (malformed packets, out of order packets, bad
checksums, or packets rejected by the remote system) to permit before
dropping the connection.  The default is 100.
@item remote-window
If this is between 1 and 7 inclusive, the window size requested by the
remote system is ignored and this is used instead.  This can be useful
when dealing with some poor UUCP packages.  The default is 0, which
means that the remote system's request is honored.
@item remote-packet-size
If this is between 32 and 4096 inclusive the packet size requested by
the remote system is ignored and this is used instead.  There is
probably no good reason to use this.  The default is 0, which means that
the remote system's request is honored.
@end table

The @samp{f} protocol is intended for use with error-correcting modems
only; it checksums each file as a whole, so any error causes the entire
file to be retransmitted.  It supports the following commands, both of
which take numeric arguments:

@table @code
@item timeout
The timeout in seconds before giving up.  The default is 120.
@item retries
How many times to retry sending a file.  The default is 2.
@end table

The @samp{t} and @samp{e} protocols are intended for use over TCP or
some other communication path with end to end reliability, as they do no
checking of the data at all.  They both support a single command, which
takes a numeric argument:

@table @code
@item timeout
The timeout in seconds before giving up.  The default is 120.
@end table

The protocol parameters are reset to their default values after each
call.

@end table

@node File Transfer Control, Miscellaneous (sys), Protocol Selection, sys File
@subsection File Transfer Control

@table @code

@item call-request @var{boolean}
@findex call-request

The @var{boolean} is checked when the local system places the call.  It
determines whether the remote system may request any file transfers.
The default is yes.

@item called-request @var{boolean}
@findex called-request

The @var{boolean} is checked when the remote system calls in.  It
determines whether the remote system may request any file transfers.
The default is yes.

@item request @var{boolean}
@findex request

Equivalent to specifying both @samp{call-request @var{boolean}} and
@samp{called-request @var{boolean}}.

@item call-transfer @var{boolean}
@findex call-transfer

The @var{boolean} is checked when the local system places the call.  It
determines whether the local system may do file transfers queued up for
the remote system.  The default is yes.

@item called-transfer @var{boolean}
@findex called-transfer

The @var{boolean} is checked when the remote system calls in.  It
determines whether the local system may do file transfers queued up for
the remote system.  The default is yes.

@item transfer @var{boolean}
@findex transfer

Equivalent to specifying both @samp{call-transfer @var{boolean}}
@samp{called-transfer @var{boolean}}.

@item call-local-size @var{number} @var{string}
@findex call-local-size

The @var{string} is a time string (@pxref{Time Strings}).  The
@var{number} is the size in bytes of the largest file that should be
transferred at a time matching the time string if the local system
placed the call and the request was made by the local system.  This
command may appear multiple times in a single alternate.  If this
command does not appear, or if none of the time strings match, there are
no size restrictions.

With all the size control commands, the size of a file from the remote
system (as opposed to a file from the local system) will only be checked
if the other system is running this package; other UUCP packages will
not understand a maximum size request, nor will they inform this package
of the size of remote files.

@item call-remote-size @var{number} @var{string}
@findex call-remote-size

Specify the size in bytes of the largest file that should be
transferred at a given time by remote request when the local system
placed the call.  This command may appear multiple times in a single
alternate.  If this command does not appear, there are no size
restrictions.

@item called-local-size @var{number} @var{string}
@findex called-local-size

Specify the size in bytes of the largest file that should be transferred
at a given time by local request when the remote system placed the call.
This command may appear multiple times in a single alternate. If this
command does not appear, there are no size restrictions.

@item called-remote-size @var{number} @var{string}
@findex called-remote-size

Specify the size in bytes of the largest file that should be transferred
at a given time by remote request when the remote system placed the
call.  This command may appear multiple times in a single alternate. If
this command does not appear, there are no size restrictions.

@item local-send @var{strings}
@findex local-send

Specifies that files in the directories named by the @var{strings} may
be sent to the remote system when requested locally (using @code{uucp}
or @code{uux}).  The directories in the list should be separated by
whitespace.  A @kbd{~} may be used for the public directory.  On a Unix
system, this is typically @file{/usr/spool/uucppublic}; the public
directory may be set with the @code{pubdir} command.  Here is an example
of @code{local-send}:

@example
local-send ~ /usr/spool/ftp/pub
@end example

Listing a directory allows all files within the directory and all
subdirectories to be sent.  Directories may be excluded by preceding
them with an exclamation point.  For example:

@example
local-send /usr/ftp !/usr/ftp/private ~
@end example

@noindent
means that all files in @file{/usr/ftp} or the public directory may be
sent, except those files in @file{/usr/ftp/private}.  The list of
directories is read from left to right, and the last directory to apply
takes effect; this means that directories should be listed from top
down.  The default is the root directory (i.e., any file at all may be
sent by local request).

@item remote-send @var{strings}
@findex remote-send

Specifies that files in the named directories may be sent to the remote
system when requested by the remote system.  The default is @kbd{~}.

@item local-receive @var{strings}
@findex local-receive

Specifies that files may be received into the named directories when
requested by a local user.  The default is @kbd{~}.

@item remote-receive @var{strings}
@findex remote-receive

Specifies that files may be received into the named directories when
requested by the remote system.  The default is @kbd{~}.  On Unix, the
remote system may only request that files be received into directories
that are writeable by the world, regardless of how this is set.

@end table

@node Miscellaneous (sys), Default sys File Values, File Transfer Control, sys File
@subsection Miscellaneous sys File Commands

@table @code

@item sequence @var{boolean}
@findex sequence

If @var{boolean} is true, then conversation sequencing is automatically
used for the remote system, so that if somebody manages to spoof as the
remote system, it will be detected the next time the remote system
actually calls.  This is false by default.

@item command-path @var{string}
@findex command-path

Specifies the path (a list of whitespace separated directories) to be
searched to locate commands to execute.  This is only used for commands
requested by @code{uux}, not for chat programs.  The default is from
@file{policy.h}.

@item commands @var{strings}
@findex commands

The list of commands which the remote system is permitted to execute
locally.  For example: @samp{commands rnews rmail}.  If the value is
@samp{ALL} (case significant), all commands may be executed.  The
default is @samp{rnews rmail}.

@item free-space @var{number}
@findex free-space

Specify the minimum amount of file system space (in bytes) to leave free
after receiving a file.  If the incoming file will not fit, it will be
rejected.  This will only work when talking to another instance of this
package, since older UUCP packages do not provide the file size of
incoming files.  There is no provision for reserving space, so it is
still possible for multiple @code{uucico} daemons to use up all
available file space; a sufficiently large value for @code{free-space}
will avoid this problem to some extent.  The default is from
@file{policy.h}.  Not all systems may be able to provide the amount of
available space.

@item pubdir @var{string}
@findex pubdir in sys file

Specifies the public directory that is used when @kbd{~} is specifed in
a file transfer or a list of directories.  This essentially overrides
the public directory specified in the main configuration file for this
system only.  The default is the public directory specified in the main
configuration file (which defaults to a value from @file{policy.h}).

@item debug @var{string} @dots{}
@findex debug in sys file

Set additional debugging for calls to or from the system.  This may be
used to debug a connection with a specific system.  It is particularly
useful when debugging incoming calls, since debugging information will
be generated whenever the call comes in.  See the @code{debug} command
in the main configuration file (@pxref{Debugging Levels}) for more
details.  The debugging information specified here is in addition to
that specified in the main configuration file or on the command line.

@item max-remote-debug @var{string} @dots{}
@findex max-remote-debug

When the system calls in, it may request that the debugging level be set
to a certain value.  This command may be used to put a limit on the
debugging level which the system may request, to avoid filling up the
disk with debugging information.  Only the debugging types named in the
@code{max-remote-debug} command may be turned on by the remote system.
To prohibit any debugging, use @samp{max-remote-debug none}.  The
default is @samp{abnormal,chat,handshake}; to turn off these default
entries, you must use @samp{max-remote-debug none} followed by other
@code{max-remote-debug} commands specifying the settings you want.

@item timetable @var{string} @var{string}
@findex timetable

This is actually not specific to a system; it can appear anywhere in the
file(s).  In a future release this command will probably be moved to the
main configuration file.

The @code{timetable} defines a timetable that may be used in
subsequently appearing time strings; @ref{Time Strings}.  The first
string names the timetable entry; the second is a time string.

The following @code{timetable} commands are predefined.  The NonPeak
timetable is included for compatibility.  It originally described the
offpeak hours of Tymnet and Telenet, but both have since changed their
schedules.

@example
timetable Evening Wk1705-0755,Sa,Su
timetable Night Wk2305-0755,Sa,Su2305-1655
timetable NonPeak Wk1805-0655,Sa,Su
@end example

If this command does not appear, then obviously no additional timetables
will be defined.

@end table

@node Default sys File Values,  , Miscellaneous (sys), sys File
@subsection Default sys File Values

The following are used as default values for all systems; they can be
considered as appearing before the start of the file.

@example
timetable Evening Wk1705-0755,Sa,Su
timetable Night Wk2305-0755,Sa,Su2305-1655
timetable NonPeak Wk1805-0655,Sa,Su
time Never
chat "" \r\c ogin:-BREAK-ogin:-BREAK-ogin: \L word: \P
chat-timeout 10
callback n
sequence n
request y
transfer y
local-send /
remote-send ~
local-receive ~
remove-receive ~
command-path [ from @file{policy.h} ]
commands rnews rmail
max-remote-debug abnormal,chat,handshake
@end example

@node port File, dial File, sys File, Configuration Files
@section The Port Configuration File
@cindex port file
@cindex port configuration file
@cindex configuration file (port)

The port files may be used to name and describe ports.  The first
command in each file must be @code{port}.  All command up to the next
@code{port} command then describe that port.  There are different types
of ports; each type supports its own set of commands.  Each command
indicates which types of ports support it.  There may be many ports with
the same name; if a system requests a port by name then each port with
that name will be tried until an unlocked one is found.

@table @code

@item port @var{string}
@findex port in port file

Introduces and names a port.

@item type @var{string}
@findex type

Define the type of port.  The default is @samp{modem}.  If this command
appears, it must immediately follow the @code{port} command.  The type defines
what commands are subsequently allowed.  Currently the types are:

@table @samp
@item modem
For a modem hookup.
@item stdin
For a connection through standard input and standard output, as when
@code{uucico} is run as a login shell.
@item direct
For a direct connection to another system.
@item tcp
For a connection using TCP.
@end table

@item protocol @var{string}
@findex protocol in port file

Specify a list of protocols to use for this port.  This is just like the
corresponding command for a system (@pxref{Protocol Selection}).  A
protocol list for a system takes precedence over a list for a port.

@item protocol-parameter @var{character} @var{strings} [ any type ]
@findex protocol-parameter in port file

The same command as the @code{protocol-parameter} command used for
systems (@pxref{Protocol Selection}).  This one takes precedence.

@item seven-bit @var{boolean} [ any type ]
@findex seven-bit in port file

This is only used during protocol negotiation; if the argument is
@samp{true}, it forces the selection of a protocol which works across a
seven-bit link.  It does not prevent eight bit characters from being
transmitted.  The default is @samp{false}.

@item reliable @var{boolean} [ any type ]
@findex reliable in port file

This is only used during protocol negotiation; if the argument is
@samp{false}, it forces the selection of a protocol which works across
an unreliable communication link.  The default is @samp{true}.  It would
be more common to specify this for a dialer rather than a port.

@item device @var{string} [ modem and direct only ]
@findex device

Names the device associated with this port.  If the device is not named,
the port name is taken as the device.  Device names are system
dependent, but a Unix example would be @file{/dev/ttyd0}.

@item baud @var{number} [ modem and direct only ]
@findex baud in port file
@itemx speed @var{number} [modem and direct only ]
@findex speed in port file

The speed this port runs at.  If a system specifies a speed but no port
name, then all ports which match the speed will be tried in order.  If
the speed is not specified here and is not specified by the system, the
natural speed of the port will be used by default.

@item baud-range @var{number} @var{number} [ modem only ]
@findex baud-range
@itemx speed-range @var{number} @var{number} [ modem only ]
@findex speed-range

Specify a range of speeds this port can run at.  The first number is the
minimum speed, the second number is the maximum speed.  These numbers
will be used when matching a system which specifies a desired speed.
The simple @code{speed} (or @code{baud}) command is still used to
determine the speed to run at if the system does not specify a speed.
For example, the command @samp{speed-range 300 19200} means that the
port will match any system which uses a speed from 300 to 19200 baud
(and will use the speed specified by the system); this could be combined
with @samp{speed 2400}, which means that when this port is used with a
system that does not specify a speed, the port will be used at 2400
baud.

@item carrier @var{boolean} [ modem only ]
@findex carrier in port file

The argument indicates whether the port supports carrier.  If it does
not, carrier will never be required on this port, regardless of what the
modem chat script indicates.  The default is @samp{true}.

@item dial-device @var{string} [ modem only ]
@findex dial-device

Dialing instructions should be output to the named device, rather than
to the normal port device.  The default is to output to the normal port
device.

@item dialer @var{string} [ modem only ]
@findex dialer in port file

Name a dialer to use.  The information is looked up in the dialer file.
There is no default.  Some sort of dialer information must be specified
to call out on a modem.

@item dialer @var{string} @dots{} [ modem only ]

Execute a dialer command.  If a dialer is named (by using the first form
of this command, described just above), these commands are ignored.
They may be used to specify dialer information directly in simple
situations without needing to go to a separate file.  There is no
default.  Some sort of dialer information must be specified to call out
on a modem.

@item dialer-sequence @var{strings} [ modem only ]
@findex dialer-sequence

Name a sequence of dialers and tokens (phone numbers) to use.  The first
argument names a dialer, and the second argument names a token.  The
third argument names another dialer, and so on.  If there are an odd
number of arguments, the phone number specified with a @code{phone}
command in the system file is used as the final token.  The token is
what is used for @kbd{\D} or @kbd{\T} in the dialer chat script.  If the
token in this string is @kbd{\D}, the system phone number will be used;
if it is @kbd{\T}, the system phone number will be used after undergoing
dialcodes translation.  A missing final token is taken as @kbd{\D}.

This command currently does not work if @code{dial-device} is specified;
to handle this correctly will require a more systematic notion of chat
scripts.  Moreover, only the @code{complete} and @code{abort} chat
scripts from the first dialer specified are used, and only the protocol
parameters from the first dialer are used.

@item lockname @var{string} [ modem and direct only ]
@findex lockname

Give the name to use when locking this port.  On Unix, this is the name
of the file that will be created in the lock directory.  It is used as
is, so on Unix it should generally start with @samp{LCK..}.  For
example, if a single port were named both @file{/dev/ttycu0} and
@file{/dev/tty0} (perhaps with different characteristics keyed on the
minor device number), then the command @code{lockname LCK..ttycu0} could
be used to force the latter to use the same lock file name as the
former.

@item service @var{string} [ tcp only ]
@findex service

Name the TCP port number to use.  This may be a number.  If not, it will
be looked up in @file{/etc/services}.  If this is not specified, the
string @samp{uucp} is looked up in @file{/etc/services}.  If it is not
found, port number 540 (the standard UUCP-over-TCP port number) will be
used.

@end table

@node dial File, Security, port File, Configuration Files
@section The Dialer Configuration File
@cindex dial file
@cindex dialer configuration file
@cindex configuration file (dial)

The dialer configuration files define dialers.  The first command in
each file must be a @code{dialer} command, which names the dialer.
Subsequent commands up to the next @code{dialer} command are associated
with the named dialer.

@table @code

@item dialer @var{string}
@findex dialer in dial file

Introduces and names a dialer.

@item chat @var{strings}
@findex chat in dial file
@item chat-timeout @var{number}
@findex chat-timeout in dial file
@item chat-fail @var{string}
@findex chat-fail in dial file
@item chat-seven-bit @var{boolean}
@findex chat-seven-bit in dial file
@item chat-program @var{strings}
@findex chat-program in dial file

Specify a chat script to be used to dial the phone.  See @ref{Chat
Scripts} for full details on chat scripts.

Taylor UUCP will sleep for one second between attempts to dial out on a
modem.  If your modem requires a longer wait period, you must start your
chat script with delays (@samp{\d} in a send string).

The chat script will be read from and sent to the port specified by the
@code{dial-device} command for the port, if there is one.

The following escape addition escape sequences may appear in send
strings:

@table @kbd
@item \D
send phone number without dialcode translation
@item \T
send phone number with dialcode translation
@item \M
do not require carrier
@item \m
require carrier (fail if not present)
@end table

See the description of the dialcodes file (@pxref{Configuration File
Names}) for a description of dialcode translation.  If the port does not
support carrier (as set by the @code{carrier} command in the port file)
@kbd{\M} and @kbd{\m} are ignored.  If both the port and the dialer
support carrier (as set by the @code{carrier} command in the port file
and the @code{carrier} command in the dialer file), then every chat
script implicitly begins with @kbd{\M} and ends with @kbd{\m}.  There is
no default chat script for dialers.

The following additional escape sequences may be used in
@code{chat-program}:

@table @kbd
@item \D
phone number without dialcode translation
@item \T
phone number with dialcode translation
@end table

If the program changes the port in any way (e.g., sets parity) the
changes will be preserved during protocol negotiation, but once the
protocol is selected it will change the port settings.

@item dialtone @var{string}
@findex dialtone

A string to output when dialing the phone number which causes the modem
to wait for a secondary dial tone.  This is used to translate the
@kbd{=} character in a phone number.  The default is a comma.

@item pause @var{string}
@findex pause

A string to output when dialing the phone number which causes the modem
to wait for 1 second.  This is used to translate the @kbd{-} character
in a phone number.  The default is a comma.

@item carrier @var{boolean}
@findex carrier in dial file

If the argument is @samp{true}, the dialer supports the modem carrier
signal.  After the phone number is dialed, @code{uucico} will require
that carrier be on.  One some systems, it will be able to wait for it.
If the argument is @samp{false}, carrier will not be required.  The
default is @samp{true}.

@item carrier-wait @var{number}
@findex carrier-wait

If the port is supposed to wait for carrier, this may be used to
indicate how many seconds to wait.  The default is 60 seconds.  Only
some systems support waiting for carrier.

@item dtr-toggle @var{boolean} @var{boolean}
@findex dtr-toggle

If the first argument is @samp{true}, then DTR is toggled before using
the modem.  This is only supported on some systems and some ports.  The
second @var{boolean} need not be present; if it is, and it is
@samp{true}, the program will sleep for 1 second after toggling DTR.
The default is not to toggle DTR.

@item complete-chat @var{strings}
@findex complete-chat
@item complete-chat-timeout @var{number}
@findex complete-chat-timeout
@item complete-chat-fail @var{string}
@findex complete-chat-fail
@item complete-chat-seven-bit @var{boolean}
@findex complete-chat-seven-bit
@item complete-chat-program @var{strings}
@findex complete-chat-program

These commands define a chat script (@pxref{Chat Scripts}) which is run
when a call is finished normally.  This allows the modem to be reset.
There is no default.  No additional escape sequences may be used.

@item complete @var{string}
@findex complete

This is a simple use of @code{complete-chat}.  It is equivalent to
@code{complete-chat "" @var{string}}; this has the effect of sending
@var{string} to the modem when a call finishes normally.

@item abort-chat @var{strings}
@findex abort-chat
@item abort-chat-timeout @var{number}
@findex abort-chat-timeout
@item abort-chat-fail @var{string}
@findex abort-chat-fail
@item abort-chat-seven-bit @var{boolean}
@findex abort-chat-seven-bit
@item abort-chat-program @var{strings}
@findex abort-chat-program

These commands define a chat script (@pxref{Chat Scripts}) to be run
when a call is aborted.  They may be used to interrupt and reset the
modem.  There is no default.  No additional escape sequences may be
used.

@item abort @var{string}
@findex abort

This is a simple use of @code{abort-chat}.  It is equivalent to
@code{abort-chat "" @var{string}}; this has the effect of sending
@var{string} to the modem when a call is aborted.

@item protocol-parameter @var{character} @var{strings}
@findex protocol-parameter in dial file

Set protocol parameters, just like the @code{protocol-parameter} command
in the system configuration file or the port configuration file; see
@ref{Protocol Selection}.  These parameters take precedence, then those
for the port, then those for the system.

@item seven-bit @var{boolean}
@findex seven-bit in dial file

This is only used during protocol negotiation; if it is @samp{true}, it
forces selection of a protocol which works across a seven-bit link.  It
does not prevent eight bit characters from being transmitted.  The
default is @samp{false}.  It would be more common to specify this for a
port than for a dialer.

@item reliable @var{boolean}
@findex reliable in dial file

This is only used during protocol negotiation; if it is @samp{false}, it
forces selection of a protocol which works across an unreliable
communication link.  The default is @samp{true}.

@end table

@node Security,  , dial File, Configuration Files
@section Security

This discussion of UUCP security applies only to Unix.  It is a bit
cursory; suggestions for improvement are solicited.

UUCP is traditionally not very secure.  Taylor UUCP addresses some
security issues, but is still far from being a secure system.

If security is very important to you, then you should not permit any
external access to your computer, including UUCP.  Any opening to the
outside world is a potential security risk.

By default Taylor UUCP provides few mechanisms to secure local users of
the system from each other.  You can allow increased security by putting
the owner of the UUCP programs (normally @code{uucp}) into a separate
group; the use of this is explained in the following paragraphs, which
refer to this separate group as @code{uucp-group}.

When the @code{uucp} program is invoked to copy a file to a remote
system, it will by default copy the file into the UUCP spool directory.
When the @code{uux} program is used, the @samp{-C} switch must be used
to copy the file into the UUCP spool directory.  In any case, once the
file has been copied into the spool directory, other local users will
not be able to access it.  In version 1.03 there is a security hole in
that for the file to be copied it must be readable by @code{uucp}.
Changing the group of the file to @code{uucp-group} and making it group
readable will permit UUCP to read it without granting access to other
users.

When a file is requested from a remote system, UUCP will only permit it
to be placed in a directory which is writable by the requesting user.
The directory must also be writable by UUCP.  A local user can create a
directory with a group of @code{uucp-group} and set the mode to permit
group write access.  This will allow the file be requested without
permitting it to be viewed by any other user.

There is no provision for security for @code{uucp} requests (as opposed
to @code{uux} requests) made by a user on a remote system.  A file sent
over by a remote request may only be placed in a directory which is
world writable, and the file will be world readable and writable.  This
will permit any local user to destroy or replace the contents of the
file.  A file requested by a remote system must be world readable, and
the directory it is in must be world readable.  Any local user will be
able to examine, although not necessarily modify, the file before it is
sent.

There are some security holes and race conditions that apply to the
above discussion which I will not elaborate on.  They are not hidden
from anybody who reads the source code, but they are somewhat technical
and difficult (but scarcely impossible) to exploit.  Suffice it to say
that even under the best of conditions UUCP is not completely secure.

For many sites, security from remote sites is a more important
consideration.  Fortunately, Taylor UUCP does provide some support in
this area.

The greatest security is provided by always dialing out to the other
site.  This prevents anybody from pretending to be the other site.  Of
course, only one side of the connection can do this.

If remote dialins must be permitted, then it is best if the dialin line
is used only for UUCP.  If this is the case, then you should create a
call-in password file (@pxref{Configuration File Names}) and let
@code{uucico} do its own login prompting.  For example, to let remote
sites log in on a port named @samp{entry} in the port file (@pxref{port
file}) you might invoke @samp{uucico -p entry}.  This would cause
@code{uucico} to enter an endless loop of login prompts and daemon
executions.  The advantage of this approach is that even if remote users
break into the system by guessing or learning the password, they will
only be able to do whatever @code{uucico} permits them to do.  They will
not be able to start a shell on your system.

If remote users can dial in and log on to your system, then you have a
security hazard more serious than that posed by UUCP.  But then, you
probably knew that already.

Once your system has connected with the remote UUCP, there is a fair
amount of control you can exercise.  You can use the @code{remote-send}
and @code{remote-receive} commands to control the directories the remote
UUCP can access.  You can use the @code{request} command to prevent the
remote UUCP from making any requests of your system at all; however, if
you do this it will not even be able to send you mail or news.  If you
do permit remote requests, you should be careful to restrict what
commands may be executed at the remote system's request.  The default is
@code{rmail} and @code{rnews}, which will suffice for most systems.

If different remote systems call in and they must be granted different
privileges (perhaps some systems are within the same organization and
some are not) then the @code{called-login} command should be used for
each system to require that they different login names.  Otherwise it
would be simple for a remote system to use the @code{myname} command and
pretend to be a different system.  The @code{sequence} command can be
used to detect when one system pretended to be another, but since the
sequence numbers must be reset manually after a failed handshake this
can sometimes be more trouble than it's worth.

@node Protocols, Hacking, Configuration Files, Top
@chapter UUCP protocol internals

This chapter describes how the various UUCP protocols work, and
discusses some other internal UUCP issues.  

This chapter is quite technical.  You do not need to understand it, or
even read it, in order to use Taylor UUCP.  It is intended for people
who are interested in how UUCP code works.

Most of the discussion covers the protocols used by all UUCP packages,
not just Taylor UUCP.  Any information specific to Taylor UUCP is
indicated as such.  There are some pointers to the actual functions in
the Taylor UUCP source code, for those who are extremely interested in
actual UUCP implementation.

@menu
* Grades::                      UUCP grades
* Lock Files::                  UUCP lock file format
* UUCP Protocol::               The common UUCP protocol
* g Protocol::                  The UUCP @samp{g} protocol
* f Protocol::                  The UUCP @samp{f} protocol
* t Protocol::                  The UUCP @samp{t} protocol
* e Protocol::                  The UUCP @samp{e} protocol
* x Protocol::                  The UUCP @samp{x} protocol
* d Protocol::                  The UUCP @samp{d} protocol
* Capital G Protocol::          The UUCP @samp{G} protocol
* Documentation References::    Documentation references
@end menu

@node Grades, Lock Files, Protocols, Protocols
@section UUCP Grades
@cindex grades

Modern UUCP packages support grades for each command.  The grades
generally range from @samp{A} (the highest) to @samp{Z} followed by
@samp{a} to @samp{z}.  Taylor UUCP also supports @samp{0} to @samp{9}
before @samp{A}.  Some UUCP packages may permit any ASCII character as a
grade.

On Unix, these grades are encoded in the name of the command file.  A
command file name generally has the form

@example
C.nnnngssss
@end example

@noindent
where @var{nnnn} is the remote system name for which the command is
queued, @var{g} is a single character grade, and @var{ssss} is a four
character sequence number.  For example, a command file created for the
system @file{airs} at grade @samp{Z} might be named

@example
C.airsZ2551
@end example

The remote system name will be truncated to seven characters, to ensure
that the command file name will fit in the 14 character file name limit
of the traditional Unix file system.  UUCP packages which have no other
means of distinguishing which command files are intended for which
systems thus require all @emph{systems they connect to} to have names
that are unique in the first seven characters.  Some UUCP packages use a
variant of this format which truncates the system name to six
characters.  BNU uses a different spool directory format, which allows
up to fourteen characters to be used for each system name.  The Taylor
UUCP spool directory format is configurable.  The new Taylor spool
directory format permits system names to be as long as file names; the
maximum length of a file name depends on the particular Unix file system
being used.

The sequence number in the command file name may be a decimal integer,
or it may be a hexadecimal integer, or it may contain any alphanumeric
character.  Different UUCP packages are different.

Taylor UUCP creates command files in the function
@code{zsysdep_spool_commands}.  The file name is constructed by the
function @code{zsfile_name}, which knows about all the different types
of spool directories supported by Taylor UUCP.  The Taylor UUCP sequence
number can contain any alphanumeric character; the next sequence number
is determined by the function @code{fscmd_seq}.

I do not know how command grades are handled in non-Unix UUCP
packages.

Modern UUCP packages allow you to restrict file transfer by grade
depending on the time of day.  Typically this is done with a line in
the @file{Systems} (or @file{L.sys}) file like this:

@example
airs Any/Z,Any2305-0855 ...
@end example

This allows only grades @samp{Z} and above to be transferred at any
time.  Lower grades may only be transferred at night.  I believe that
this grade restriction applies to local commands as well as to remote
commands, but I am not sure.  It may only apply if the UUCP package
places the call, not if it is called by the remote system.  Taylor UUCP
can use the @code{timegrade} and @code{call-timegrade} commands
(@pxref{When to Call}) to achieve the same effect (and supports the
above format when reading @file{Systems} or @file{L.sys}).

This sort of grade restriction is most useful if you know what grades
are being used at the remote site.  The default grades used depend on
the UUCP package.  Generally @code{uucp} and @code{uux} have different
defaults.  A particular grade can be specified with the @samp{-g} option
to @code{uucp} or @code{uux}.  For example, to request execution of
rnews on airs with grade @samp{d}, you might use something like

@example
uux -gd - airs!rnews <article
@end example

@samp{uunet} queues up mail at grade @samp{Z} and news at grade
@samp{d}.  The example above would allow mail to be received at any
time, but would only permit news to be transferred at night.

@node Lock Files, UUCP Protocol, Grades, Protocols
@section UUCP Lock File Format
@cindex lock files

This discussion applies only to Unix.  I have no idea how UUCP locks
ports on other systems.

UUCP creates files to lock serial ports and systems.  On most (if not
all) systems, these same lock files are also used by cu to coordinate
access to serial ports.  On some systems getty also uses these lock
files.

The lock file normally contains the process ID of the locking process.
This makes it easy to determine whether a lock is still valid.  The
algorithm is to create a temporary file and then link it to the name
that must be locked.  If the link fails because a file with that name
already exists, the existing file is read to get the process ID.  If the
process still exists, the lock attempt fails.  Otherwise the lock file
is deleted and the locking algorithm is retried.

Older UUCP packages put the lock files in the main UUCP spool
directory, /usr/spool/uucp.  BNU UUCP generally puts the lock files in
a directory of their own, usually /usr/spool/locks or /etc/locks.

The original UUCP lock file format encoded the process ID as a four byte
binary number.  The order of the bytes was host-dependent.  BNU UUCP
stores the process ID as a ten byte ASCII decimal number, with a
trailing newline.  For example, if process 1570 holds a lock file, it
would contain the eleven characters space, space, space, space, space,
space, one, five, seven, zero, newline.  Some versions of UUCP add a
second line indicating which program created the lock (uucp, cu, or
getty).  I have also seen a third type of UUCP lock file which did not
contain the process ID at all.

The name of the lock file is generally "LCK.." followed by the base name
of the device.  For example, to lock /dev/ttyd0 the file LCK..ttyd0
would be created.  There are various exceptions.  On SCO Unix, the lock
file name is always forced to lower case even if the device name has
upper case letters.  System V Release 4 UUCP forms the lock file name
using the major and minor device numbers rather than the device name
(this is pretty sensible if you think about it).

Taylor UUCP can be configured to use various different types of locking.
The actual locking code is in the function @code{fsdo_lock}.

@node UUCP Protocol, g Protocol, Lock Files, Protocols
@section The Common UUCP Protocol
@cindex UUCP protocol
@cindex handshake
@cindex protocol (UUCP)

The UUCP protocol is a conversation between two UUCP packages.  A UUCP
conversation consists of three parts: an initial handshake, a series
of file transfer requests, and a final handshake.

Before the initial handshake, the caller will usually have logged in the
called machine and somehow started the UUCP package there.  On Unix this
is normally done by setting the shell of the login name used to
@file{uucico}.

@menu
* Initial Handshake::           Initial handshake
* File Requests::               File requests
* Final Handshake::             Final handshake
@end menu

@node Initial Handshake, File Requests, UUCP Protocol, UUCP Protocol
@subsection Initial Handshake

All messages in the initial handshake begin with a @samp{^P} (a byte
with the octal value \020) and end with a null byte (\000).

Taylor UUCP implements the initial handshake for the calling machine in
@code{fdo_call}, and for the called machine in @code{faccept_call}.

The initial handshake goes as follows.  It is begun by the called
machine.

@table @asis

@item called: @samp{\020Shere=@var{hostname}\000}
The @var{hostname} is the UUCP name of the called machine.  Older UUCP
packages do not output it, and simply send @samp{\020Shere\000}.

@item caller: @samp{\020S@var{hostname} @var{options}\000}
The @var{hostname} is the UUCP name of the calling machine.  The
following @var{options} may appear (or there may be none):

@table @samp

@item -Q@var{seq}
Report sequence number for this conversation.  The sequence number is
stored at both sites, and incremented after each call.  If there is a
sequence number mismatch, something has gone wrong (somebody may have
broken security by pretending to be one of the machines) and the call is
denied.  If the sequence number changes on one of the machines, perhaps
because of an attempted breakin or because a disk backup was restored,
the sequence numbers on the two machines must be reconciled manually.

@item -x@var{level}
Requests the called system to set its debugging level to the specified
value.  This is not supported by all systems.  Taylor UUCP currently
never generates this switch.  When it sees it, it restricts the value
according to @code{max-remote-debug} (@pxref{Miscellaneous (sys)}).

@item -p@var{grade}
@itemx -vgrade=@var{grade}
Requests the called system to only transfer files of the specified grade
or higher.  This is not supported by all systems.  Some systems support
@samp{-p}, some support @samp{-vgrade=}.  Taylor UUCP supports both.

@item -R
Indicates that the calling UUCP understands how to restart failed file
transmissions.  Supported only by System V Release 4 UUCP.

@item -U@var{limit}
Reports the @code{ulimit} value of the calling UUCP.  The limit is
specified as a base 16 number in C notation (e.g., @samp{-U0x1000000}).
This number is the number of 512 byte blocks in the largest file which
the calling UUCP can create.  The called UUCP may not transfer a file
larger than this.  Supported by System V Release 4 UUCP.  Taylor UUCP
understands this option, but never generates it.

@item -N
Indicates that the calling UUCP understands the Taylor UUCP size
limiting extensions.  Supported only by Taylor UUCP.

@end table

@item called: @samp{\020ROK\000}
There are actually several possible responses.

@table @samp

@item ROK
The calling UUCP is acceptable, and the handshake proceeds to the
protocol negotiation.  Some options may also appear; see below.

@item ROKN
The calling UUCP is acceptable, it specified @samp{-N}, and the called
UUCP also understands the Taylor UUCP size limiting extensions.
Supported only by Taylor UUCP.

@item RLCK
The called UUCP already has a lock for the calling UUCP, which normally
indicates the two machines are already communicating.

@item RCB
The called UUCP will call back.  This may be used to avoid impostors.
Note that only one machine out of each pair should call back, or no
conversation will ever begin.

@item RBADSEQ
The call sequence number is wrong (see the @samp{-Q} discussion above).

@item RLOGIN
The calling UUCP is using the wrong login name.

@item RYou are unknown to me
The calling UUCP is not known to the called UUCP, and the called UUCP
does not permit connections from unknown systems.

@end table

If the response is @samp{ROK}, the following options are supported by
System V Release 4 UUCP.

@table @samp

@item -R
The called UUCP knows how to restart failed file transmissions.

@item -U@var{limit}
Reports the ulimit value of the called UUCP.  The limit is specified as
a base 16 number in C notation.  This number is the number of 512 byte
blocks in the largest file which the called UUCP can create.  The
calling UUCP may not send a file larger than this.

@item -x@var{level}
I'm told that this is sometimes sent by SVR4 UUCP, but I'm not sure
exactly what it means.  It may request the calling UUCP to set its
debugging level to the specified value.

@end table

If the response is not @samp{ROK} (or @samp{ROKN}) both sides hang up
the phone, abandoning the call.

@item called: @samp{\020P@var{protocols}\000}
The @kbd{P} is a literal character.  Note that the called UUCP outputs
two strings in a row.  The @var{protocols} string is a list of UUCP
protocols supported by the caller.  Each UUCP protocol has a single
character name.  For example, the called UUCP might send
@samp{\020Pgf\000}.

@item caller: @samp{\020U@var{protocol}\000}
The @kbd{U} is a literal character.  The calling UUCP selects which
@var{protocol} to use out of the protocols offered by the called UUCP.
If there are no mutually supported protocols, the calling UUCP sends
@samp{\020UN\000} and both sides hang up the phone.  Otherwise the
calling UUCP sends something like @samp{\020Ug\000}.

@end table

Most UUCP packages will consider each locally supported protocol in turn
and select the first one supported by the called UUCP.  With some
versions of BNU UUCP, this can be modified by giving a list of protocols
after the device name in the Devices file or the @file{Systems} file.
Taylor UUCP provides the @code{protocol} command which may be used
either for a system (@pxref{Protocol Selection}) or a port (@pxref{port
file}).

After the protocol has been selected and the initial handshake has been
completed, both sides turn on the selected protocol.  For some protocols
(notably @samp{g}) a further handshake is done at this point.

Each protocol supports a method for sending a command to the remote
system.  This method is used to transmit a series of commands between
the two UUCP packages.  At all times, one package is the master and the
other is the slave.  Initially, the calling UUCP is the master.

If a protocol error occurs during the exchange of commands, both sides
move immediately to the final handshake.

@node File Requests, Final Handshake, Initial Handshake, UUCP Protocol
@subsection File Requests

The master will send one of four commands: @samp{S}, @samp{R}, @samp{X}
or @samp{H}.

Any file name referred to below is either an absolute pathname beginning
with @samp{/}, a public directory pathname beginning with @samp{~/}, a
pathname relative to a user's home directory beginning with
@samp{~@var{user}/}, or a spool directory file name.  File names in the
spool directory are not pathnames, but instead are converted to
pathnames within the spool directory by UUCP.  They always begin with
@samp{C.} (for a command file created by @code{uucp} or @code{uux}),
@samp{D.} (for a data file created by @code{uucp}, @code{uux} or by an
execution, or received from another system for an execution), or
@samp{X.} (for an execution file created by @code{uux} or received from
another system).

Taylor UUCP chooses which request to send next in the function
@code{fuucp}.  This is also where Taylor UUCP processes incoming
commands from the remote system.

@menu
* S Request::                   S request
* R Request::                   R request
* X Request::                   X request
* H Request::                   H request
@end menu

@node S Request, R Request, File Requests, File Requests
@subsubsection S Request

master: @samp{S @var{from} @var{to} @var{user} -@var{options} @var{temp}
@var{mode} @var{notify} @var{size}}

The @samp{S} and the @samp{-} are literal characters.  This is a request
by the master to send a file to the slave.  Taylor UUCP handles the
@samp{S} request in the function @code{fsend_file}.

@table @var

@item from
The name of the file to send.  If the @samp{C} option does not appear in
@var{options}, the master will actually open and send this file.
Otherwise the file has been copied to the spool directory, where it is
named @var{temp}.  The slave ignores this field unless @var{to} is a
directory, in which case the basename of @var{from} will be used as the
file name.  If @var{from} is a spool directory filename, it must be a
data file created for or by an execution, and must begin with @samp{D.}.

@item to
The name to give the file on the slave.  If this field names a directory
the file is placed within that directory with the basename of
@var{from}.  A name ending in @samp{/} is taken to be a directory even
if one does not already exist with that name.  If @var{to} begins with
@samp{X.}, an execution file will be created on the slave.  Otherwise,
if @var{to} begins with @samp{D.} it names a data file to be used by
some execution file.  Otherwise, @var{to} should not be in the spool
directory.

@item user
The name of the user who requested the transfer.

@item options
A list of options to control the transfer.  The following options are
defined (all options are single characters):

@table @samp

@item C
The file has been copied to the spool directory (the master should use
@var{temp} rather than @var{from}).

@item c
The file has not been copied to the spool directory (this is the
default).

@item d
The slave should create directories as necessary (this is the default).

@item f
The slave should not create directories if necessary, but should fail
the transfer instead.

@item m
The master should send mail to @var{user} when the transfer is complete.

@item n
The slave should send mail to @var{notify} when the transfer is
complete.

@end table

@item temp
If the @samp{C} option appears in @var{options}, this names the file to
be sent.  Otherwise if @var{from} is in the spool directory, @var{temp}
is the same as @var{from}.  Otherwise @var{temp} is a dummy string,
normally @samp{D.0}.  After the transfer has been succesfully completed,
the master will delete the file @var{temp}.

@item mode
This is an octal number giving the mode of the file on the master.  If
the file is not in the spool directory, the slave will always create it
with mode 0666, except that if (@var{mode} & 0111) is not zero (the file
is executable), the slave will create the file with mode 0777.  If the
file is in the spool directory, some UUCP packages will use the
algorithm above and some will always create the file with mode 0600
(Taylor UUCP does the latter).

@item notify
This field is only used if the @samp{n} option appears in @var{options}.
Otherwise, it may not appear, or it may be the string @samp{dummy}, or
it may simply be a pair of double quotes.  If the @samp{n} option is
specified, then when the transfer is successfully completed the slave
will send mail to @var{notify}, which must be a legal mailing address on
the slave.

@item size
This field is only present when doing size negotiation, either with
Taylor UUCP or SVR4 UUCP.  It is the size of the file in bytes.  SVR4
UUCP sends the size in base 16 as 0x@dots{} while Taylor UUCP sends the
size as a decimal integer (a later version of Taylor UUCP will probably
change to the SVR4 behaviour).

@end table

The slave then responds with an S command response.  Taylor UUCP
generates these responses in @code{freceive_file} and
@code{ftransfer_fail}.

@table @samp

@item SY @var{start}
The slave is willing to accept the file, and file transfer begins.  The
@var{start} field will only be present when using SVR4 file restart.  It
specifies the byte offset into the file at which to start sending.  If
this is a new file, @var{start} will be 0x0.

@item SN2
The slave denies permission to transfer the file.  This can mean that
the destination directory may not be accessed, or that no requests are
permitted.  It implies that the file transfer will never succeed.

@item SN4
The slave is unable to create the necessary temporary file.  This
implies that the file transfer might succeed later.

@item SN6
This is only used by Taylor UUCP size negotiation.  It means that the
slave considers the file too large to transfer at the moment, but it may
be possible to transfer it at some other time.

@item SN7
This is only used by Taylor UUCP size negotiation.  It means that the
slave considers the file too large to ever transfer.

@end table

If the slave responds with @samp{SY}, a file transfer begins.  When the
file transfer is complete, the slave sends a @samp{C} command response.
Taylor UUCP generates this confirmation in @code{fprecfile_confirm} and
checks it in @code{fpsendfile_confirm}.

@table @samp

@item CY
The file transfer was successful.

@item CN5
The temporary file could not be moved into the final location.  This
implies that the file transfer will never succeed.

@end table

After the @samp{C} command response has been received (in the @samp{SY}
case) or immediately (in an @samp{SN} case) the master will send another
command.

@node R Request, X Request, S Request, File Requests
@subsubsection R Request

master: @samp{R @var{from} @var{to} @var{user} -@var{options}
@var{size}}

The @samp{R} and the @samp{-} are literal characters.  This is a request
by the master to receive a file from the slave.  I do not know how SVR4
UUCP implements file transfer restart in this case.  Taylor UUCP
implements the @samp{R} request in @code{freceive_file}.

@table @var

@item from
This is the name of the file on the slave which the master wishes to
receive.  It must not be in the spool directory, and it may not contain
any wildcards.

@item to
This is the name of the file to create on the master.  I do not believe
that it can be a directory.  It may only be in the spool directory if
this file is being requested to support an execution either on the
master or on some system other than the slave.

@item user
The name of the user who requested the transfer.

@item options
A list of options to control the transfer.  The following options are
defined (all options are single characters):

@table @samp

@item d
The master should create directories as necessary (this is the default).

@item f
The master should not create directories if necessary, but should fail
the transfer instead.

@item m
The master should send mail to @var{user} when the transfer is complete.

@end table

@item size
This only appears if Taylor UUCP size negotiation is being used.  It
specifies the largest file which the master is prepared to accept (when
using SVR4 UUCP, this was specified in the @samp{-U} option during the
initial handshake).

@end table

The slave then responds with an @samp{R} command response.  Taylor UUCP
generates these responses in @code{fsend_file} and
@code{ftransfer_fail}.

@table @samp

@item RY @var{mode}
The slave is willing to send the file, and file transfer begins.
@var{mode} is the octal mode of the file on the slave.  The master uses
this to set the mode of the file on the master's system just as the
slave does the @var{mode} argument in the send command (@pxref{S
Request}).

@item RN2
The slave is not willing to send the file, either because it is not
permitted or because the file does not exist.  This implies that the
file request will never succeed.

@item RN6
This is only used by Taylor UUCP size negotiation.  It means that the
file is too large to send, either because of the size limit specifies by
the master or because the slave considers it too large.  The file
transfer might succeed later, or it might not (this will be cleared up
in a later release of Taylor UUCP).

@end table

If the slave responds with @samp{RY}, a file transfer begins.  When the
file transfer is complete, the master sends a @samp{C} command.  The
slave pretty much ignores this, although it may log it.  Taylor UUCP
sends this confirmation in @code{fprecfile_confirm} and checks it in
@code{fpsendfile_confirm}.

@table @samp

@item CY
The file transfer was successful.

@item CN5
The temporary file could not be moved into the final
location.

@end table

After the @samp{C} command response has been sent (in the @samp{RY}
case) or immediately (in an @samp{RN} case) the master will send another
command.

@node X Request, H Request, R Request, File Requests
@subsubsection X Request

master: @samp{X @var{from} @var{to} @var{user} -@var{options}}

The @samp{X} and the @samp{-} are literal characters.  This is a request
by the master to, in essence, execute @code{uucp} on the slave.  The
slave should execute @samp{uucp @var{from} @var{to}}.  Taylor UUCP
generates the @samp{X} request in @code{fxcmd} and handles it in
@code{fdo_xcmd}.

@table @var

@item from
This is the name of the file or files on the slave which the master
wishes to transfer.  Any wildcards are expanded on the slave.  If the
master is requesting that the files be transferred to itself, the
request would normally contain wildcard characters, since otherwise an
@samp{R} command would suffice.  The master can also use this command to
request that the slave transfer files to a third system.

@item to
This is the name of the file or directory to which the files should be
transferred.  This will normally use a UUCP name.  For example, if the
master wishes to receive the files itself, it would use
@file{@var{master}!@var{path}}.

@item user
The name of the user who requested the transfer.

@item options
A list of options to control the transfer.  It is not clear which, if
any, options are supported by most UUCP packages.  Taylor UUCP ignores
the options field.

@end table

The slave then responds with an X command response.  Taylor UUCP sends
this response in either @code{fxcmd_confirm} or @code{ftransfer_fail}.

@table @samp

@item XY
The request was accepted, and the appropriate file transfer commands
have been queued up for later processing.

@item XN
The request was denied.  No particular reason is given.

@end table

In either case, the master will then send another command.

@node H Request,  , X Request, File Requests
@subsubsection H Request

master: @samp{H}

This is used by the master to hang up the connection.  The slave will
respond with an @samp{H} command response.  Taylor UUCP processes this
request in @code{fhangup_request}, @code{fhangup_reply}, and
@code{fgetcmd}.

@table @samp

@item HY
The slave agrees to hang up the connection.  In this case the master
sends another @samp{HY} command.  In some UUCP packages, including
Taylor UUCP, the slave will then send a third @samp{HY} command.  At
this point the protocol is shut down, and the final handshake is begun.

@item HN
The slave does not agree to hang up.  In this case the master and the
slave exchange roles.  The next command will be sent by the former
slave, which is the new master.  The roles may be reversed several times
during a single connection.

@end table

@node Final Handshake,  , File Requests, UUCP Protocol
@subsection Final Handshake

After the protocol has been shut down, the final handshake is
performed.  This handshake has no real purpose, and some UUCP packages
simply drop the connection rather than do it (in fact, some will drop
the connection immediately after both sides agree to hangup, without
even closing down the protocol).  Taylor UUCP always sends the
appropriate final handshake string (in @code{fdo_call} or
@code{faccept_call}) but ignores the handshake string from the other
side unless it is in @samp{handshake} debugging mode.

@table @asis

@item caller: @samp{\020OOOOOO\000}

@item called: @samp{\020OOOOOOO\000}

@end table

That is, the calling UUCP sends six letter O's and the called UUCP
replies with seven letter O's.  Some UUCP packages always send six O's.

@node g Protocol, f Protocol, UUCP Protocol, Protocols
@section The UUCP @samp{g} Protocol
@cindex g protocol
@cindex protocol (g)

The @samp{g} protocol is a packet based flow controlled error correcting
protocol that requires an eight bit clear connection.  It is the
original UUCP protocol, and is supported by all UUCP implementations.
Many implementations of it are only able to support small window and
packet sizes, specifically a window size of 3 and a packet size of 64
bytes, but the protocol itself can support up to a window size of 7 and
a packet size of 4096 bytes.  Complaints about the inefficiency of the
@samp{g} protocol generally refer to specific implementations, rather
than the correctly implemented protocol.

The @samp{g} protocol was originally designed for general packet drivers,
and thus contains some features that are not used by UUCP, including
an alternate data channel and the ability to renegotiate packet and
window sizes during the communication session.

The @samp{g} protocol is spoofed by many Telebit modems.  When spoofing is
in effect, each Telebit modem uses the @samp{g} protocol to communicate
with the attached computer, but the data between the modems is sent
using a Telebit proprietary error correcting protocol.  This allows
for very high throughput over the Telebit connection, which, because
it is half-duplex, would not normally be able to handle the @samp{g}
protocol very well at all.

This discussion of the @samp{g} protocol explains how it works, but does
not discuss useful error handling techniques.  Some discussion of this
can be found in Jamie E. Hanrahan's paper (@pxref{Documentation
references}).  A detailed examination of the source code would also be
profitable.

The Taylor UUCP code to handle the @samp{g} protocol is in the file
@file{protg.c}.  There are a number of functions; the most important
ones are @code{fgstart}, @code{fgsend_control}, @code{fgsenddata}, and
@code{fgprocess_data}.

All @samp{g} protocol communication is done with packets.  Each packet
begins with a six byte header.  Control packets consist only of the
header.  Data packets contain additional data.

The header is as follows:

@table @asis

@item @samp{\020}
Every packet begins with a @samp{^P}.

@item @var{k} (1 <= @var{k} <= 9)
@ifinfo
The @var{k} value is always 9 for a control packet.  For a data packet,
the @var{k} value indicates how must data follows the six byte header.
The amount of data is 2 ** (@var{k} + 4), where ** indicates
exponentiation.  Thus a @var{k} value of 1 means 32 data bytes and a
@var{k} value of 8 means 4096 data bytes.  The @var{k} value for a data
packet must be between 1 and 8 inclusive.
@end ifinfo
@iftex
The @var{k} value is always 9 for a control packet.  For a data packet,
the @var{k} value indicates how must data follows the six byte header.
The amount of data is @math{2^{@var{k} + 4}}.  Thus a @var{k} value of 1
means 32 data bytes and a @var{k} value of 8 means 4096 data bytes.  The
@var{k} value for a data packet must be between 1 and 8 inclusive.
@end iftex

@item checksum low byte
@itemx checksum high byte
The checksum value is described below.

@item control byte
The control packet indicates the type of packet, and is described below.

@item xor byte
This byte is the xor of @var{k}, the checksum low byte, the checksum
high byte and the control byte (i.e. the second, third, fourth and fifth
header bytes).  It is used to ensure that the header data is valid.

@end table

The control byte in the header is composed of three bit fields, referred
to here as @var{tt} (two bits), @var{xxx} (three bits) and @var{yyy}
(three bits).  The complete byte is @var{ttxxxyyy}, or (@var{tt} << 6) +
(@var{xxx} << 3) + @var{yyy}.

The @var{tt} field takes on the following values:

@table @asis

@item 0
This is a control packet.  In this case the @var{k} byte in the header
must be 9.  The @var{xxx} field indicates the type of control packet;
the types are described below.

@item 1
This is an alternate data channel packet.  This is not used by UUCP.

@item 2
This is a data packet, and the entire contents of the attached data
field (whose length is given by the @var{k} byte in the header) are
valid.  The @var{xxx} and @var{yyy} fields are described below.

@item 3
This is a short data packet.  Let the length of the data field (as given
by the @var{k} byte in the header) be @code{l}.  Let the first byte in
the data field be @code{b1}.  If @code{b1} is less than 128 (if the most
significant bit of @code{b1} is 0), then there are @code{l - b1} valid
bytes of data in the data field, beginning with the second byte.  If
@code{b1 >= 128}, let @code{b2} be the second byte in the data field.
Then there are @code{l - ((b1 & 0x7f) + (b2 << 7))} valid bytes of data
in the data field, beginning with the third byte.  In all cases @code{l}
bytes of data are sent (and all data bytes participate in the checksum
calculation) but some of the trailing bytes may be dropped by the
receiver.  The @var{xxx} and @var{yyy} fields are described below.

@end table

In a data packet (short or not) the @var{xxx} field gives the sequence
number of the packet.  Thus sequence numbers can range from 0 to 7,
inclusive.  The @var{yyy} field gives the sequence number of the last
correctly received packet.

Each communication direction uses a window which indicates how many
unacknowledged packets may be transmitted before waiting for an
acknowledgement.  The window may range from 1 to 7 packets, and may be
different in each direction. For example, if the window is 3 and the
last packet acknowledged was packet number 6, packet numbers 7, 0 and 1
may be sent but the sender must wait for an acknowledgement before
sending packet number 2.  This acknowledgement could come as the
@var{yyy} field of a data packet or as the @var{yyy} field of a
@code{RJ} or @code{RR} control packet (described below).

Each packet must be transmitted in order (the sender may not skip
sequence numbers).  Each packet must be acknowledged, and each packet
must be acknowledged in order.

In a control packet, the @var{xxx} field takes on the following values:

@table @asis

@item 1 @code{CLOSE}
The connection should be closed immediately.  This is typically sent
when one side has seen too many errors and wants to give up.  It is also
sent when shutting down the protocol.  If an unexpected @code{CLOSE}
packet is received, a @code{CLOSE} packet should be sent in reply and
the @samp{g} protocol should halt, causing UUCP to enter the final
handshake.

@item 2 @code{RJ} or @code{NAK}
The last packet was not received correctly.  The @var{yyy} field
contains the sequence number of the last correctly received packet.

@item 3 @code{SRJ}
Selective reject.  The @var{yyy} field contains the sequence number of a
packet that was not received correctly, and should be retransmitted.
This is not used by UUCP, and most implementations will not recognize
it.  Taylor UUCP will recognize it but not generate it.

@item 4 @code{RR} or @code{ACK}
Packet acknowledgement.  The @var{yyy} field contains the sequence
number of the last correctly received packet.

@item 5 @code{INITC}
Third initialization packet.  The @var{yyy} field contains the maximum
window size to use.

@item 6 @code{INITB}
@ifinfo
Second initialization packet.  The @var{yyy} field contains the packet
size to use.  It requests a size of 2 ** (@var{yyy} + 5).  Note that
this is not the same coding used for the @var{k} byte in the packet
header (it is 1 less).  Some UUCP implementations can handle any packet
size up to that specified; some can only handled exactly the size
specified.  Taylor UUCP will always accept any packet size.
@end ifinfo
@iftex
Second initialization packet.  The @var{yyy} field contains the packet
size to use.  It requests a size of @math{2^{@var{yyy}+5}}.  Note that
this is not the same coding used for the @var{k} byte in the packet
header (it is 1 less).  Some UUCP implementations can handle any packet
size up to that specified; some can only handled exactly the size
specified.  Taylor UUCP will always accept any packet size.
@end iftex

@item 7 @code{INITA}
First initialization packet.  The @var{yyy} field contains the maximum
window size to use.

@end table

To compute the checksum, call the control byte (the fifth byte in the
header) @code{c}.

The checksum of a control packet is simply @code{0xaaaa - c}.

The checksum of a data packet is @code{0xaaaa - (@var{check} ^ c)}
(@code{^} denotes exclusive or, as in C), and @code{@var{check}} is the
result of the following routine run on the contents of the data field
(every byte in the data field participates in the checksum, even for a
short data packet).  Below is the routine used by Taylor UUCP; it is a
slightly modified version of a routine which John Gilmore patched from
G.L.  Chesson's original paper.  The @code{z} argument points to the
data and the @code{c} argument indicates how much data there is.

@example
int
igchecksum (z, c)
     register const char *z;
     register int c;
@{
  register unsigned int ichk1, ichk2;

  ichk1 = 0xffff;
  ichk2 = 0;

  do
    @{
      register unsigned int b;

      /* Rotate ichk1 left.  */
      if ((ichk1 & 0x8000) == 0)
        ichk1 <<= 1;
      else
        @{
          ichk1 <<= 1;
          ++ichk1;
        @}

      /* Add the next character to ichk1.  */
      b = *z++ & 0xff;
      ichk1 += b;

      /* Add ichk1 xor the character position in the buffer
         counting from the back to ichk2.  */
      ichk2 += ichk1 ^ c;

      /* If the character was zero, or adding it to ichk1
         caused an overflow, xor ichk2 to ichk1.  */
      if (b == 0 || (ichk1 & 0xffff) < b)
        ichk1 ^= ichk2;
    @}
  while (--c > 0);

  return ichk1 & 0xffff;
@}
@end example

When the @samp{g} protocol is started, the calling UUCP sends an INITA
control packet with the window size it wishes the called UUCP to use.
The called UUCP responds with an INITA packet with the window size it
wishes the calling UUCP to use.  Pairs of INITB and INITC packets are
then similarly exchanged.  When these exchanges are completed, the
protocol is considered to have been started.  The window size is sent
twice, with both the INITA and the INITC packets.

When a UUCP package transmits a command, it sends one or more data
packets.  All the data packets will normally be complete, although some
UUCP packages may send the last one as a short packet.  The command
string is sent with a trailing null byte, to let the receiving package
know when the command is finished.  Some UUCP packages require the last
byte of the last packet sent to be null, even if the command ends
earlier in the packet.  Some packages may require all the trailing bytes
in the last packet to be null, but I have not confirmed this.

When a UUCP package sends a file, it will send a sequence of data
packets.  The end of the file is signalled by a short data packet
containing zero valid bytes (it will normally be preceeded by a short
data packet containing the last few bytes in the file).

Note that the sequence numbers cover the entire communication session,
including both command and file data.

When the protocol is shut down, each UUCP package sends a @code{CLOSE}
control packet.

@node f Protocol, t Protocol, g Protocol, Protocols
@section The UUCP @samp{f} Protocol
@cindex f protocol
@cindex protocol (f)

The @samp{f} protocol is a seven bit protocol which checksums an entire
file at a time.  It only uses the characters between \040 and \176
(ASCII space and @samp{~}) inclusive as well as the carriage return
character.  It can be very efficient for transferring text only data,
but it is very inefficient at transferring eight bit data (such as
compressed news).  It is not flow controlled, and the checksum is fairly
insecure over large files, so using it over a serial connection requires
handshaking (@code{XON}/@code{XOFF} can be used) and error correcting
modems.  Some people think it should not be used even under those
circumstances.

I believe the @samp{f} protocol originated in BSD versions of UUCP.  It was
originally intended for transmission over X.25 PAD links.

The Taylor UUCP code for the @samp{f} protocol is in @file{protf.c}.

The @samp{f} protocol has no startup or finish protocol.  However, both
sides typically sleep for a couple of seconds before starting up,
because they switch the terminal into @code{XON}/@code{XOFF} mode and
want to allow the changes to settle before beginning transmission.

When a UUCP package transmits a command, it simply sends a string
terminated by a carriage return.

When a UUCP package transmits a file, each byte b of the file is
translated according to the following table:

@example
       0 <= b <=  037: 0172, b + 0100 (0100 to 0137)
     040 <= b <= 0171:       b        ( 040 to 0171)
    0172 <= b <= 0177: 0173, b - 0100 ( 072 to  077)
    0200 <= b <= 0237: 0174, b - 0100 (0100 to 0137)
    0240 <= b <= 0371: 0175, b - 0200 ( 040 to 0171)
    0372 <= b <= 0377: 0176, b - 0300 ( 072 to  077)
@end example

That is, a byte between \040 and \171 inclusive is transmitted as is,
and all other bytes are prefixed and modified as shown.

When all the file data is sent, a seven byte sequence is sent: two bytes
of \176 followed by four ASCII bytes of the checksum as printed in base
16 followed by a carriage return.  For example, if the checksum was
0x1234, this would be sent: "\176\1761234\r".

The checksum is initialized to 0xffff.  For each byte that is sent it is
modified as follows (where @code{b} is the byte before it has been
transformed as described above):

@example
/* Rotate the checksum left.  */
if ((ichk & 0x8000) == 0)
  ichk <<= 1;
else
  @{
    ichk <<= 1;
    ++ichk;
  @}

/* Add the next byte into the checksum.  */
ichk += b;
@end example

When the receiving UUCP sees the checksum, it compares it against its
own calculated checksum and replies with a single character followed
by a carriage return.

@table @samp

@item G
The file was received correctly.

@item R
The checksum did not match, and the file should be resent from the
beginning.

@item Q
The checksum did not match, but too many retries have occurred and the
communication session should be abandoned.

@end table

The sending UUCP checks the returned character and acts accordingly.

@node t Protocol, e Protocol, f Protocol, Protocols
@section The UUCP @samp{t} Protocol
@cindex t protocol
@cindex protocol (t)

The @samp{t} protocol is intended for TCP links.  It does no error
checking or flow control, and requires an eight bit clear channel.

I believe the @samp{t} protocol originated in BSD versions of UUCP.

The Taylor UUCP code for the @samp{t} protocol is in @file{prott.c}.

When a UUCP package transmits a command, it first gets the length of the
command string, @var{c}.  It then sends ((@var{c} / 512) + 1) * 512
bytes (the smallest multiple of 512 which can hold @var{c} bytes plus a
null byte) consisting of the command string itself followed by trailing
null bytes.

When a UUCP package sends a file, it sends it in blocks.  Each block
contains at most 1024 bytes of data.  Each block consists of four bytes
containing the amount of data in binary (most significant byte first,
the same format as used by the Unix function @code{htonl}) followed by
that amount of data.  The end of the file is signalled by a block
containing zero bytes of data.

@node e Protocol, x Protocol, t Protocol, Protocols
@section The UUCP @samp{e} Protocol
@cindex e protocol
@cindex protocol (e)

The @samp{e} protocol is similar to the @samp{t} protocol.  It does no
flow control or error checking and is intended for use over TCP.

The @samp{e} protocol originated in versions of BNU UUCP.

The Taylor UUCP code for the @samp{e} protocol is in @file{prote.c}.

When a UUCP package transmits a command, it simply sends the command as
an ASCII string terminated by a null byte.

When a UUCP package transmits a file, it sends the complete size of the
file as an ASCII decimal number.  The ASCII string is padded out to 20
bytes with null bytes (i.e., if the file is 1000 bytes long, it sends
@samp{1000\0\0\0\0\0\0\0\0\0\0\0\0\0\0\0\0}).  It then sends the entire
file.

@node x Protocol, d Protocol, e Protocol, Protocols
@section The UUCP @samp{x} Protocol

I believe that the @samp{x} protocol was intended for use over X.25
virtual circuits.  It relies on a write of zero bytes being read as zero
bytes without stopping communication.  I have heard that it does not
work correctly.  If someone would care to fill this in more, I would be
grateful.  Taylor UUCP does not implement the @samp{x} protocol.

@node d Protocol, Capital G Protocol, x Protocol, Protocols
@section The UUCP @samp{d} Protocol

This is apparently used for DataKit connections, and relies on a write
of zero bytes being read as zero bytes, much as the @samp{x} protocol
does.  I don't really know anything else about it.  Taylor UUCP does not
implement the @samp{d} protocol.

@node Capital G Protocol, Documentation References, d Protocol, Protocols
@section The UUCP @samp{G} Protocol

The @samp{G} protocol is apparently simply the @samp{g} protocol, except
that it is known to support all possible window and packet sizes.  It
was introduced by SVR4 UUCP; the SVR4 implementation of the @samp{g}
protocol is apparently fixed at a packet size of 64 and a window size of
7.  Taylor UUCP does not recognize the @samp{G} protocol.  It does
support all window and packet sizes for the @samp{g} protocol.

@node Documentation References,  , Capital G Protocol, Protocols
@section Documentation References

I took a lot of the information from Jamie E. Hanrahan's paper in the
Fall 1990 DECUS Symposium, and from Managing UUCP and Usenet by Tim
O'Reilly and Grace Todino (with contributions by several other people).
The latter includes most of the former, and is published by O'Reilly &
Associates, Inc.

Some information is originally due to a Usenet article by Chuck Wegrzyn.
The information on the @samp{g} protocol comes partially from a paper by
G.L. Chesson of Bell Laboratories, partially from Jamie E. Hanrahan's
paper, and partially from source code by John Gilmore.  The information
on the @samp{f} protocol comes from the source code by Piet Berteema.
The information on the @samp{t} protocol comes from the source code by
Rick Adams.  The information on the @samp{e} protocol comes from a
Usenet article by Matthias Urlichs.

@node Hacking, Acknowledgements, Protocols, Top
@chapter Hacking Taylor UUCP

This chapter provides the briefest of guides to the Taylor UUCP source
code itself.

@menu
* System Dependence::           System Dependence
* Naming Conventions::          Naming Conventions
* Patches::                     Patches
@end menu

@node System Dependence, Naming Conventions, Hacking, Hacking
@section System Dependence

The code is carefully segregated into a system independent portion and a
system dependent portion.  The system dependent code is in @file{sys?.*}
and @file{tcp.c}.  Note that @file{sysh.*} is included as
@file{sysdep.h}.  Currently the only system dependent files are for
Unix, and the file name for all of them ends in @file{.unx}.  Hopefully
the code will eventually be ported to other systems.

With the right configuration parameters, the system independent code
calls only ANSI C functions.  Some of the less common ANSI C functions
are also provided in @file{util.c}.  The replacement function
@code{strtol} in @file{util.c} assumes that the characters @kbd{A} to
@kbd{F} and @kbd{a} to @kbd{f} appear in strictly sequential order.  The
function @code{igradecmp} in @file{config.c} assumes that the upper and
lower case letters appear in order.  Both assumptions are true for ASCII
and EBCDIC, but neither is guaranteed by ANSI C.  The replacement
function @code{memmove} in @file{util.c} assumes that two arbitrary
pointers may be safely compared.  Disregarding these caveats, I believe
that the system independent portion of the code is strictly conforming.

That's not too exciting, since all the work is done in the system
dependent code.  I think that this code can conform to POSIX 1003.1,
given the right compilation parameters.  I'm a bit less certain about
this, though.

The code is in use on a 16 bit segmented system with no function
prototypes, so I'm certain that all casts to long and pointers are done
when necessary.

The code uses alloca extensively.  It comes with a simple replacement,
in @file{alloca.c} (otherwise I would lost ANSI C conformance, after
all).  Using a real @code{alloca} function will be considerably more
efficient.  It will also cause significant stack usage, which may be a
problem on systems without virtual memory.

@node Naming Conventions, Patches, System Dependence, Hacking
@section Naming Conventions

I use a modified Hungarian naming convention for my variables and
functions.  As with all naming conventions, the code is rather opaque if
you are not familiar with it, but becomes clear and easy to use with
time.

The first character indicates the type of the variable (or function
return value).  Sometimes additional characters are used.  I use the
following type prefixes:

@table @samp
@item a
array; the next character is the type of an element
@item b
byte or character
@item c
count of something
@item e
stdio FILE *
@item f
boolean
@item i
generic integer
@item l
double
@item o
file descriptor (as returned by open, creat, etc.)
@item p
generic pointer
@item q
pointer to structure
@item s
structure
@item u
void (function return values only)
@item z
character string
@end table

A generic pointer ('p') is sometimes a @code{void *}, sometimes a
function pointer in which case the prefix is pf, and sometimes a pointer
to another type, in which case the next character is the type to which
it points (pf is overloaded).

An array of strings (@code{char *[]}) would be named @code{az} (array of
string).  If this array were passed to a function, the function
parameter would be named @code{paz} (pointer to array of string).

Note that the variable name prefixes do not necessarily indicate the
type of the variable.  For example, a variable prefixed with i may be
int, long or short.  Similarly, a variable prefixed with b may be a char
or an int; for example, the return value of getchar would be caught in
an int variable prefixed with b.

For a non-local variable (extern or file static), the first character
after the type prefix is capitalized.

Most static variables and functions use another letter after the type
prefix to indicate which module they come from.  This is to help
distinguish different names in the debugger.  For example, all static
functions in @file{protg.c}, the @samp{g} protocol source code, use a
module prefix of @samp{g}.  This isn't too useful, as a number of
modules use a module prefix of @samp{s}.

@node Patches,  , Naming Conventions, Hacking
@section Patches

I am always grateful for any patches sent in.  Much of the flexibility
and portability of the code is due to other people.  Please do not
hesitate to send me any changes you have found necessary or useful.

I rarely apply the patches directly.  Instead I work my way through them
and apply each one separately.  This ensures that the naming remains
consistent and that I understand all the code.

@node Acknowledgements, Index (concepts), Hacking, Top
@chapter Acknowledgements

This is a list of people who gave help or suggestions while I was
working on the Taylor UUCP project.  Appearance on this list does not
constitute endorsement of the program, particularly since some of the
comments were criticisms.  I've probably left some people off, and I
apologize for any oversight; it does not mean your contribution was
unappreciated.

@ifinfo
First of all, I would like to thank the people at Infinity Development
Systems (formerly AIRS, which lives on in the domain name, at least for
now) for permitting me to use their computers and @file{uunet} access.
I would also like to thank Richard Stallman @file{<rms@@gnu.ai.mit.edu>}
for founding the Free Software Foundation and John Gilmore
@file{<gnu@@cygnus.com>} for writing the initial version of gnuucp which
was a direct inspiration for this somewhat larger project.  Chip
Salzenberg @file{<chip@@tct.com>} contributed many early patches.
Franc,ois Pinard @file{<pinard@@iro.umontreal.ca>} tirelessly tested the
code and suggested many improvements.  He also put together the initial
version of this document.  Finally, Verbus M. Counts
@file{<verbus@@westmark.com>} and Centel Federal Systems, Inc. deserve
special thanks, since they actually paid me money to port this code to
System III.
@end ifinfo
@iftex
First of all, I would like to thank the people at Infinity Development
Systems (formerly AIRS, which lives on in the domain name, at least for
now) for permitting me to use their computers and @file{uunet} access.
I would also like to thank Richard Stallman @file{<rms@@gnu.ai.mit.edu>}
for founding the Free Software Foundation and John Gilmore
@file{<gnu@@cygnus.com>} for writing the initial version of gnuucp which
was a direct inspiration for this somewhat larger project.  Chip
Salzenberg @file{<chip@@tct.com>} contributed many early patches.
@tex
Fran\c cois Pinard
@end tex
@file{<pinard@@iro.umontreal.ca>} tirelessly tested
the code and suggested many improvements.  He also put together the
initial version of this document.  Finally, Verbus M. Counts
@file{<verbus@@westmark.com>} and Centel Federal Systems, Inc. deserve
special thanks, since they actually paid me money to port this code to
System III.
@end iftex

In alphabetical order:

@example
"Earle F. Ake - SAIC" @file{<ake@@Dayton.SAIC.COM>}
@file{mra@@searchtech.com} (Michael Almond)
@file{cambler@@zeus.calpoly.edu} (Christopher J. Ambler)
Brian W. Antoine @file{<briana@@tau-ceti.isc-br.com>}
@file{jantypas@@soft21.s21.com} (John Antypas)
@file{nba@@sysware.DK} (Niels Baggesen)
@file{uunet!hotmomma!sdb} (Scott Ballantyne)
@file{magus!dolphin!zack} (Zacharias Beckman)
@file{mike@@mbsun.ann-arbor.mi.us} (Mike Bernson)
@file{bob@@usixth.sublink.org} (Roberto Biancardi)
Marc Boucher @file{<marc@@CAM.ORG>}
@file{dean@@coplex.com} (Dean Brooks)
@file{dave@@dlb.com} (Dave Buck)
@file{gordon@@sneaky.lonestar.org} (Gordon Burditt)
@file{mib@@gnu.ai.mit.edu} (Michael I Bushnell)
Brian Campbell @file{<brianc@@quantum.on.ca>}
@file{verbus@@westmark.westmark.com} (Verbus M. Counts)
@file{cbmvax!snark.thyrsus.com!cowan} (John Cowan)
@file{denny@@dakota.alisa.com} (Bob Denny)
@file{dje@@ersys.edmonton.ab.ca} (Doug Evans)
@file{fenner@@jazz.psu.edu} (Bill Fenner)
"David J. Fiander" @file{<golem!david@@news.lsuc.on.ca>}
Thomas Fischer @file{<batman@@olorin.dark.sub.org>}
@file{erik@@eab.retix.com} (Erik Forsberg)
Lele Gaifax @file{<piggy@@idea.sublink.org>}
@file{Peter.Galbavy@@micromuse.co.uk}
@file{hunter@@phoenix.pub.uu.oz.au} (James Gardiner [hunter])
Terry Gardner @file{<cphpcom!tjg01>}
@file{jimmy@@tokyo07.info.com} (Jim Gottlieb)
@file{ryan@@cs.umb.edu} (Daniel R. Guilderson)
@file{greg@@gagme.chi.il.us} (Gregory Gulik)
Michael Haberler @file{<mah@@parrot.prv.univie.ac.at>}
@file{guy@@auspex.auspex.com} (Guy Harris)
Petri Helenius @file{<pete@@fidata.fi>}
Peter Honeyman @file{<honey@@citi.umich.edu>}
@file{bei@@dogface.austin.tx.us} (Bob Izenberg)
@file{harvee!esj} (Eric S Johansson)
@file{chris@@cj_net.in-berlin.de} (Christof Junge)
@file{tron@@Veritas.COM} (Ronald S. Karr)
@file{kent@@sparky.IMD.Sterling.COM} (Kent Landfield)
@file{lebaron@@inrs-telecom.uquebec.ca}  (Gregory LeBaron)
@file{karl@@sugar.NeoSoft.Com} (Karl Lehenbauer)
@file{libove@@libove.det.dec.com} (Jay Vassos-Libove)
@file{bruce%blilly@@Broadcast.Sony.COM} (Bruce Lilly)
Ted Lindgreen @file{<tlindgreen@@encore.nl>}
"Arne Ludwig" @file{<arne@@rrzbu.hanse.de>}
Matthew Lyle @file{<matt@@mips.mitek.com>}
@file{djm@@eng.umd.edu} (David J. MacKenzie)
John R MacMillan @file{<chance!john@@sq.sq.com>}
@file{mem@@mv.MV.COM} (Mark E. Mallett)
@file{martelli@@cadlab.sublink.org} (Alex Martelli)
Yanek Martinson @file{<yanek@@mthvax.cs.miami.edu>}
@file{les@@chinet.chi.il.us} (Leslie Mikesell)
@file{mmitchel@@digi.lonestar.org} (Mitch Mitchell)
@file{rmohr@@infoac.rmi.de} (Rupert Mohr)
@file{service@@infohh.rmi.de} (Dirk Musstopf)
@file{lyndon@@cs.athabascau.ca} (Lyndon Nerenberg)
@file{nolan@@helios.unl.edu} (Michael Nolan)
david nugent @file{<david@@csource.oz.au>}
@file{abekas!dragoman!mikep@@decwrl.dec.com} (Mike Park)
"Mark Pizzolato 415-369-9366" @file{<mark@@infocomm.com>}
@file{dplatt@@ntg.com} (Dave Platt)
@file{eldorado@@tharr.UUCP} (Mark Powell)
@file{pozar@@kumr.lns.com} (Tim Pozar)
@file{putsch@@uicc.com} (Jeff Putsch)
Jarmo Raiha @file{<jarmo@@ksvltd.FI>}
@file{mcr@@Sandelman.OCUnix.On.Ca} (Michael Richardson)
@file{ross@@sun490.fdu.edu} (Jeff Ross)
Aleksey P. Rudnev @file{<alex@@kiae.su>}
@file{wolfgang@@wsrcc.com} (Wolfgang S. Rupprecht)
@file{tbr@@tfic.bc.ca} (Tom Rushworth)
@file{rsalz@@bbn.com} (Rich Salz)
@file{sojurn!mike@@hobbes.cert.sei.cmu.edu} (Mike Sangrey)
@file{swiers@@plains.NoDak.edu}
@file{s4mjs!mjs@@nirvo.nirvonics.com} (M. J. Shannon Jr.)
@file{peter@@ficc.ferranti.com} (Peter da Silva)
@file{frumious!pat} (Patrick Smith)
@file{roscom!monty@@bu.edu} (Monty Solomon)
@file{chs@@antic.apu.fi} (Hannu Strang)
@file{ralf@@reswi.ruhr.de} (Ralf E. Stranzenbach)
Oleg Tabarovsky @file{<olg@@olghome.pccentre.msk.su>}
John Theus @file{<john@@theus.rain.com>}
@file{rmtodd@@servalan.servalan.com} (Richard Todd)
Len Tower @file{<tower-prep@@ai.mit.edu>}
@file{mju@@mudos.ann-arbor.mi.us} (Marc Unangst)
@file{jv@@mh.nl} (Johan Vromans)
@file{rna-nl!gerben@@relay.nluug.nl} (Drs. Gerben C. Th. Wierda)
@file{frnkmth!twwells.com!bill} (T. William Wells)
@file{mauxci!eci386!woods@@apple.com} (Greg A. Woods)
@file{jon@@console.ais.org} (Jon Zeeff)
Eric Ziegast @file{<uunet!ziegast>}
@end example

@node Index (concepts), Index (configuration file), Acknowledgements, Top
@unnumbered Concept Index

@printindex cp

@node Index (configuration file),  , Index (concepts), Top
@unnumbered Index to New Configuration File

@printindex fn

@contents
@bye
