.TH MAN 1 "18 January 1983"
.UC 4
.SH NAME
man \- find manual information by keywords; print out the manual
.SH SYNOPSIS
.br
.B man
.B \-k
keyword ...
.br
.B man
.B \-f
file ...
.br
.B man
[
.B \-
] [
.B \-t
] [
section
]
title ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Man
is a program which gives information from the programmers manual.
It can be asked for one line descriptions of commands specified by
name, or for all commands whose description contains any of a set of
keywords.  It can also provide on-line access to the sections of the
printed manual.
.PP
When given the option
.B \-k
and a set of keywords,
.I man
prints out a one line synopsis of each manual sections whose
listing in the table of contents contains that keyword.
.PP
When given the option
.B \-f
and a list of file names, \fIman\fR attempts to locate manual
sections related to those files, printing out the table of contents
lines for those sections.
.PP
When neither
.B \-k
nor
.B \-f
is specified,
.I man
formats a specified set of manual pages.
If a section specifier is given
.I man
looks in the that section of the manual for the given
.I titles.
.I Section
is an arabic section number (3 for instance).  The number may followed by
a single letter classifier (1g for instance)
indicating a graphics program in section 1.  If
.I section
is omitted,
.I man
searches all sections of the manual, giving preference to commands
over subroutines in system libraries, and printing the first section
it finds, if any.
.PP
If the standard output is a teletype, or if the flag
.B \-
is given,
.I man
pipes its output through
.IR cat (1)
with the option
.B \-s
to crush out useless blank lines,
.IR ul (1)
to create proper underlines for different terminals, and through
.IR more (1)
to stop after each page on the screen.
Hit a space to continue,
a control-D to scroll 11 more lines when the output stops.
.PP
The
.B \-t
flag causes
.I man
to arrange for the specified section to be
.I troff'ed
to a suitable raster output device; see
.IR vtroff (1).
.SH FILES
/usr/man/man?/*
.br
/usr/man/cat?/*
.SH SEE\ ALSO
more(1), ul(1), whereis(1), catman(8)
.SH MESSAGES
.IP "Usage: man [ section ] name ..." 5
.IP "or: man -k keyword ..." 5
.IP "or: man -f file ..." 5
.br
This is the standard memory jogger message you get to tell you how to
use the 
.I man
command when you type it with no arguments.
.IP "But what do you want from section \fIsection\fP?" 5
.br
You didn't supply enough arguments to the 
.I man
command.  Typing the command in the form of
.sp
.ti +0.5i
.B "man  3"
.sp
that is, just a section number and no title, generates this message.
.IP "No manual entry for \fItitle\fP." 5
.br
There is no entry for the specified 
.I title
in any section of the manual.
.IP "No entry for \fItitle\fP in section \fIsection\fP of the manual." 5
.br
There is no entry for the specified 
.I title
in the specified
.I section
of the manual.
.IP "man: -k what?" 5
.br
You used the -k option, asking for anything appropriate to a title, but
forgot to supply the title.
.IP "\fItitle\fP: nothing apropriate" 5
.br
The 
.I man
command cannot find anything appropriate to the specified 
.I title
as specified with the -k option.
.IP "man: -f what?" 5
.br
You used the -f option, asking for the header line for a title, but
forgot to supply the title.
.IP "\fItitle\fP: not found" 5
.br
The 
.I man
command cannot find the specified 
.I title
as specified with the -f option.
.IP "Can't chdir to /usr/man." 5
.br
Some kind of problem in the system.  The 
.I man
command needs to change directory to the 
.I /usr/man
directory to do its job, and was unable to do so for some reason.
.SH BUGS
The manual is supposed to be reproducible either on the phototypesetter
or on a typewriter.
However, on a typewriter some information is necessarily lost.
