.TH MKCONF 1M
.SH NAME
mkconf \- generate configuration tables
.SH SYNOPSIS
mkconf
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Mkconf
examines a machine configuration table on its
standard input.
Its output is a pair of files
.I l.s
and
.I c.c.
The first is an assembler program that represents the interrupt vectors
located in low memory addresses;
the second contains initialized
block and character device switch tables.
.PP
Input to
.I mkconf
is a sequence of lines.
The following describe devices on the machine:
.PP
.RS 5
.nf
.DS
pc	(PC11)
lp	(LP11)
rf	(RS11)
hs	(RS03/RS04)
tc	(TU56)
rk	(RK03/RK05)
tm	(TU10)
rp	(RP03)
hp	(RP04/5/6)
ht	(TU16)
dc*	(DC11)
kl*	(KL11/DL11-ABC)
dl*	(DL11-E)
dp*	(DP11)
dn*	(DN11)
dh*	(DH11)
dhdm*	(DM11-BB)
du*	(DU11)
.RE
.fi
.PP
The devices marked with * may be preceded by a number telling
how many are to be included.
The console typewrite is automatically included;
don't count it as part of the KL or DL specification.
Count DN's in units of 4 (1 system unit).
.PP
The following lines are also accepted.
.TP 5
.BI "root " "dev minor"
The specified block device (e.g.
.BR hp )
is used for the root.
.I minor
is a decimal number giving the minor device.
This line must appear exactly once.
.TP 5
.BI "swap " "dev minor"
The specified block device is used for swapping.
If not given the root is used.
.TP 5
.BI "pipe " "dev minor"
The specified block device
is used to store pipes.
If not given the root is used.
.TP 5
.BI "swplo " number
.TP 5
.BI "nswap " number
Sets the origin (block number) and size of the area used for
swapping.
By default, the not very useful numbers
4000 and 872.
.TP 5
.B pack
Include the packet driver.
By default it is left out.
.TP 5
.B mpx
Include the multiplexor driver.
By default it is left out.
.SH FILES
l.s, c.c	output files
.SH SEE ALSO
`Setting up Unix', in Volume 2.
.SH BUGS
The set of devices it knows about, the set of drivers included,
and the set of devices on the machine
are mutually incomparable.
Some handwork is certain to be necessary.
Because of floating vectors that may have been missed,
It is mandatory to check the
.I l.s
file to make sure it corresponds with reality.
