.TH NROFF 1 "26 January 1982"
.SH NAME
troff, nroff \- text formatting and typesetting
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nroff
[ option ] ...
[ file ] ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Nroff
formats text in the named
.I files
for typewriter-like devices.  See also 
.I troff(1).
The full capabilities of
.I nroff
and
.I troff
are described in the
.I Nroff/Troff User's Manual.
.PP
If no
.I file
argument is present, the standard input is read.
An argument consisting of a single minus
.RB ( \- )
is taken to be a file name corresponding to the standard input.
.PP
The options, which may appear in any order so long as they appear
.I before
the files, are:
.TP "\w'\f3\-m\f1name 'u"
.BI \-o list
Print only pages whose page numbers appear in the comma-separated
.I list
of numbers and ranges.  A range
.IB N \- M
means pages
.I N
through
.IR M ;
an initial
.I \-N
means from the beginning to page
.IR N ;
and a final
.IR N \-
means from
.I N
to the end.
.TP
.BI \-n N
Number first generated page
.IR N .
.TP
.BI \-s N
Stop every
.I N
pages.
.I Nroff
will halt prior to every
.I N
pages (default
.IR N =1)
to allow paper loading or changing, and will resume upon receipt of a newline.
.TP
.BI \-m name
Prepend the macro file
.BI /usr/lib/tmac/tmac. name
to the input
.IR files .
.TP
.BI \-r aN
Set register
.I a
(one-character) to
.IR N .
.TP
.B \-i
Read standard input after the input files are exhausted.
.TP
.B \-q
Invoke the simultaneous input-output mode of the
.B rd
request.
.HP
.bd I 3
.br
.bd I
.TP
.BI \-T name
Prepare output for specified terminal.  Known
.I names
are
.B 37
for the (default) Teletype Corporation Model 37 terminal,
.B tn300
for the GE TermiNet\ 300 (or any terminal without half-line capability),
.B 300S
for the \s-1DASI\s+1-300S,
.B 300
for the \s-1DASI\s+1-300,
and
.B 450
for the \s-1DASI\s+1-450 (Diablo Hyterm).
.TP
.B \-e
Produce equally-spaced words in adjusted lines, using full terminal resolution.
.TP
.B \-h
Use output tabs during horizontal spacing
to speed output and reduce output character count.
Tab settings are assumed to be every 8 nominal character widths.
.HP
.bd I 3

.SH EXAMPLE
.IP
.nf
nroff -s4 -me filea
.fi
.PP
will
.I nroff
the named file using the
.B \-me
macro package, stopping every 4 pages.
.SH FILES
.ta \w'/usr/lib/tmac/tmac.*  'u
/usr/lib/suftab	suffix hyphenation tables
.br
/tmp/ta*	temporary file
.br
/usr/lib/tmac/tmac.*	standard macro files
.br
/usr/lib/term/*	terminal driving tables for
.I nroff
.br
.SH "SEE ALSO"
J. F. Ossanna,
.I Nroff/Troff user's manual
.br
B. W. Kernighan,
.I
A TROFF Tutorial
.br
troff(1),
eqn(1),
tbl(1),
ms(7),
me(7),
man(7),
col(1)
