.TH UUX 1C
.SH NAME
uux \- unix to unix command execution
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B uux
[
.B \-
]
command-string
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Uux
will gather 0 or more files from various systems,
execute a command on a specified system
and send standard output to a file on a specified
system.
.PP
The command-string is made up of one or more arguments that look
like a shell command line,
except that the command and file names
may be prefixed by system-name!.
A null system-name is interpreted as the local system.
.PP
File names may be one of
.IP
(1) a full pathname;
.IP
(2) a pathname preceded by
.IR ~xxx ;
where
.I xxx
is a userid on the specified system
and is replaced by that user's login directory;
.br
.IP
(3) anything else is prefixed by the current directory.
.PP
The `\-' option will cause the standard input to the
.I uux
command to be the standard input to the command-string.
.PP
For example, the command
.IP
uux "!diff usg!/usr/dan/f1 pwba!/a4/dan/f1 > !fi.diff"
.PP
will get the f1 files from the usg and pwba machines,
execute a
.I diff
command
and put the results in f1.diff in the local directory.
.PP
Any special shell characters such as <>;| should be quoted either
by quoting the entire command-string, or quoting the special
characters as individual arguments.
.SH FILES
/usr/uucp/spool - spool directory
.br
/usr/uucp/* - other data and programs
.SH SEE ALSO
uucp(1)
.br
D. A. Nowitz,
.I Uucp implementation description
.SH WARNING
An installation may, and for security reasons
generally will, limit the list of
commands executable on behalf of an incoming request from
.I uux.
Typically, a restricted site will permit little other than
the receipt of mail via 
.I uux.
.SH BUGS
Only the first command of a shell pipeline may
have a system-name!.
All other commands are executed on the system of the first
command.
.br
The use of the shell metacharacter
.B *
will probably not do what you want it to do.
.br
The shell tokens << and >> are not implemented.
.br
There is no notification of denial of execution
on the remote machine.
