.TH VPR 1 2/24/79
.UC
.SH NAME
vpr \- Versatec printer/plotter spooler
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B vpr
[
.B \-v
] [
.B \-t
[
.B \-1234
font ]
] [
.B \-w
] [
\fB\-w\fIwidth\fR
] [
.B \-m
] [ name ... ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Vpr 
causes the
named files
to be queued for printing or typeset simulation on the Versatec printer/plotter.
If no files are named, the standard input is read.
By default the input is assumed to be line printer like text and is run through
the filter
.I /usr/lib/sidebyside
giving it an argument of
.B \-w106
which arranges it four pages adjacent with 90 column lines (the rest is for the
left margin).  Since there are 8 lines per inch in the default printer font,
.I vpr
thus produces 86 lines per page (the top and bottom lines are left blank).
.PP
The following options are available:
.TP 15
.B \-1234
Specifies a font to be mounted on font position \fIi\fR.  The daemon
will construct a \fI.railmag\fR file referencing
\fI/usr/lib/vfont/name.size\fR.
.TP 15
.B \-m
Report by
.IR mail (1)
when printing is complete.
.TP
.B \-w
Do not run the input through
sidebyside.
Such processing has been done already, or full (440 character) printer
width is desired.
.TP
\fB\-w\fIwidth\fR
Use width
.I width
rather than 90 for
.I sidebyside.
.TP
.B \-v
Use the filter
.I /usr/lib/vrast
to convert the vectors to raster. The named files must be a parameter and
vector file (in that order) created by
.IR versaplot (3x)
routines.
.TP
.B \-t
Use the filter
.IR vcat (1)
to typeset the input on the Versatec.
The input must have been generated by
.IR troff (1)
run with the
.B \-t
option.
.B "This is not normally run directly!"
Since the Versatec is 36'' wide, it is wasteful to run only one page across.
The program
.IR vtroff (1)
is normally used and arranges,
using
.IR vsort (1)
for printing to occur four pages across, conserving paper.
.SH FILES
.ta 2i
/usr/spool/vpd/*	spool area
.br
/usr/lib/vpd	Versatec daemon
.br
/usr/lib/vpf	Filter for printer simulation
.br
/usr/lib/vcat	Filter for typeset simulation
.br
/usr/lib/vrast	Filter for versaplot
.br
/usr/lib/sidebyside
.SH "SEE ALSO"
troff(1), vfont(5), vp(4), pti(1),
vpq(1), vprint(1), vprm(1), vtroff(1), versaplot(3x)
.SH BUGS
You can't run bit maps in a queued fashion to the Versatec.
This is because the volume of the data (more than 1 Megabyte per
vertical foot) is unwieldy.
Instead you must follow the instructions in
.IR vp (4)
and run your program when the Versatec is idle,
or run it in the background and have it wait for the Versatec to become idle.
.PP
Queued jobs print in directory (seemingly random) order.
The Versatec is fast enough that this is not a real problem.
