.\" Copyright (c) 1980 Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.  The Berkeley software License Agreement
.\" specifies the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.\"
.\"	@(#)ht.4	6.2 (Berkeley) %G%
.\"
.TH HT 4 ""
.UC 4
.SH NAME
ht \- TM-03/TE-16,TU-45,TU-77 MASSBUS magtape interface
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B "master ht0 at mba? drive ?"
.br
.B "tape tu0 at ht0 slave 0"
.SH DESCRIPTION
The tm-03/transport combination provides a standard tape drive
interface as described in
.IR mtio (4).
All drives provide both 800 and 1600 bpi; the TE-16 runs at 45 ips,
the TU-45 at 75 ips, while the TU-77 runs at 125 ips and autoloads tapes.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
mt(1),
tar(1),
tp(1),
mtio(4),
tm(4),
ts(4),
mt(4),
ut(4)
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
\fBtu%d: no write ring\fR.  An attempt was made to write on the tape drive
when no write ring was present; this message is written on the terminal of
the user who tried to access the tape.
.PP
\fBtu%d: not online\fR.  An attempt was made to access the tape while it
was offline; this message is written on the terminal of the user
who tried to access the tape.
.PP
\fBtu%d: can't change density in mid-tape\fR.  An attempt was made to write
on a tape at a different density than is already recorded on the tape.
This message is written on the terminal of the user who tried to switch
the density.
.PP
\fBtu%d: hard error bn%d mbsr=%b er=%b ds=%b\fR.   A tape error occurred
at block \fIbn\fR; the ht error register and drive status register are
printed in octal with the bits symbolically decoded.  Any error is
fatal on non-raw tape; when possible the driver will have retried
the operation which failed several times before reporting the error.
.SH BUGS
If any non-data error is encountered on non-raw tape, it refuses to do anything
more until closed.
