.TH SPICE 1
.UC
.SH NAME
spice \- electronic circuit simulation program
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B spice
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Spice
is a general-purpose circuit simulation program for nonlinear dc,
nonlinear transient, and linear ac analyses.  Circuits may contain resistors,
capacitors, inductors, mutual inductors, independent voltage and current
sources, four types of dependent sources, transmission lines, and the four most
common semiconductor devices:  diodes, bjts, jfets, and mosfets.
.PP
Spice has built-in models for the semiconductor devices, and the user need
specify only the pertinent model parameter values.  The model for the bjt is
based on the integral charge model of Gummel and Poon;
however, if the Gummel-Poon
parameters are not specified, the model reduces to the simpler Ebers-Moll
model.  In either case, charge storage effects, ohmic resistances, and a
current-dependent output conductance may be included.  The diode model can be
used for either junction diodes or schottky barrier diodes.  The jfet model is
based on the fet model of Shichman and Hodges.  The model for the mosfet is
based on the Frohman-Grove model;  however, channel-length modulation,
subthreshold conduction, and some short-channel effects are included.
.PP
Spice reads a circuit description of the form described in the Spice users
guide and produces line-printer output.  The character plot width may be
altered to suit the output device (see .WIDTH option).
.SH SEE ALSO
``Users Guide for Spice2'' by D. Dowell, A. R. Newton, D. O. Pederson
.if t .sp .1i
.if n .sp
E. Cohen, ``Program Reference for Spice2,''  ERL Memo. ERL-M592, Electronics
Research Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley, June, 1976.
.if t .sp .1i
.if n .sp
L. W. Nagel, ``SPICE2: A Computer Program to Simulate Semiconductor Circuits,''
ERL Memo. ERL-M520, Electronics Research Laboratory, University of California,
Berkeley, May, 1975.
.SH BUGS
Date and time are not implemented in this version.
.PP
The capacitance model for MOSFETS has not been tested fully.
