.TH VGRIND 1 10/15/79
.UC
.SH NAME
vgrind \- grind nice listings of C programs for the versatec
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B vgrind
[
.B \-nx
] [
.B \-h
header
]
name ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Vgrind
formats the C programs which are arguments in a nice style using
.I troff
(1).  Comments are placed in italics, keywords in bold face,
and the name of the current function is listed down the margin of each
page as it is encountered.
.PP
The
.B \-h
option specifies a header to be placed at the top of each page.
If the program is not C source, but should be framed like the output
of
.I vgrind,
the
.B \-n
option should be specified.
.PP
To create an index, it is only necessary to create an empty file
.I index
in the current directory.  As you run
.I vgrind,
the index will be automatically kept up to date.
The index of function definitions can then be run off via
giving
.I vgrind
the
.B \-x
option and the file
.I index
as argument.
.SH FILES
.ta 2i
index	file where source for index is created
.br
/usr/lib/tmac/tmac.vgrind	macro package
.br
/usr/lib/vfontedpr		preprocessor
.SH AUTHOR
William Joy
.SH SEE ALSO
vtroff(1)
.SH BUGS
Vfontedpr assumes that a certain programming style is followed:
functions begin with the name of the function in column one, and lines
defining functions end with a ).  The function name is followed
immediately by a ``('' with no intervening space.
If this convention is not followed, the indexing and marginal function
name comment mechanisms will fail.
.sp
More generally, arbitrary formatting styles for C programs mostly look bad.
The use of spaces to align source code fails miserably; if you plan to
.I vgrind
your program you should use tabs.  This is somewhat inevitable since the
font used by
.I vgrind
is variable width.
