.\" Copyright (c) 1989, 1991 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to Berkeley by
.\" Paul Vixie.
.\" %sccs.include.redist.man%
.\"
.\"     @(#)bitstring.3	8.1 (Berkeley) %G%
.\"
.Dd 
.Dt BITSTRING 3
.Os BSD 4
.Sh NAME
.Nm bit_alloc ,
.Nm bit_clear ,
.Nm bit_decl ,
.Nm bit_ffs ,
.Nm bit_nclear ,
.Nm bit_nset,
.Nm bit_set ,
.Nm bitstr_size ,
.Nm bit_test
.Nd bit-string manipulation macros
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <bitstring.h>
.Ft bitstr_t *
.Fn bit_alloc "int nbits"
.Fn bit_decl "bit_str name" "int nbits"
.Fn bit_clear "bit_str name" "int bit"
.Fn bit_ffc "bit_str name" "int nbits" "int *value"
.Fn bit_ffs "bit_str name" "int nbits" "int *value"
.Fn bit_nclear "bit_str name" "int start" "int stop"
.Fn bit_nset "bit_str name" "int start" "int stop"
.Fn bit_set "bit_str name" "int bit"
.Fn bitstr_size "int nbits"
.Fn bit_test "bit_str name" "int bit"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
These macros operate on strings of bits.
.Pp
The macro
.Fn bit_alloc
returns a pointer of type
.Dq Fa "bitstr_t *"
to sufficient space to store
.Fa nbits
bits, or
.Dv NULL
if no space is available.
.Pp
The macro
.Fn bit_decl
allocates sufficient space to store
.Fa nbits
bits on the stack.
.Pp
The macro
.Fn bitstr_size
returns the number of elements of type
.Fa bitstr_t
necessary to store
.Fa nbits
bits.
This is useful for copying bit strings.
.Pp
The macros
.Fn bit_clear
and
.Fn bit_set
clear or set the zero-based numbered bit
.Fa bit ,
in the bit string
.Ar name .
.Pp
The
.Fn bit_nset
and
.Fn bit_nclear
macros
set or clear the zero-based numbered bits from
.Fa start
to
.Fa stop
in the bit string
.Ar name .
.Pp
The
.Fn bit_test
macro
evaluates to zero if the zero-based numbered bit
.Fa bit
of bit string
.Fa name
is set, and non-zero otherwise.
.Pp
The
.Fn bit_ffs
macro
stores in the location referenced by
.Fa value
the zero-based number of the first bit set in the array of
.Fa nbits
bits referenced by
.Fa name .
If no bits are set, the location referenced by
.Fa value
is set to \-1.
.Pp
The macro
.Fn bit_ffc
stores in the location referenced by
.Fa value
the zero-based number of the first bit not set in the array of
.Fa nbits
bits referenced by
.Fa name .
If all bits are set, the location referenced by
.Fa value
is set to \-1.
.Pp
The arguments to these macros are evaluated only once and may safely
have side effects.
.Sh EXAMPLE
.Bd -literal -offset indent
#include <limits.h>
#include <bitstring.h>

...
#define	LPR_BUSY_BIT		0
#define	LPR_FORMAT_BIT		1
#define	LPR_DOWNLOAD_BIT	2
...
#define	LPR_AVAILABLE_BIT	9
#define	LPR_MAX_BITS		10

make_lpr_available()
{
	bitstr_t bit_decl(bitlist, LPR_MAX_BITS);
	...
	bit_nclear(bitlist, 0, LPR_MAX_BITS - 1);
	...
	if (!bit_test(bitlist, LPR_BUSY_BIT)) {
		bit_clear(bitlist, LPR_FORMAT_BIT);
		bit_clear(bitlist, LPR_DOWNLOAD_BIT);
		bit_set(bitlist, LPR_AVAILABLE_BIT);
	}
}
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr malloc 3
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
functions are
.Ud .
