.\" $Revision: 1.4 $
.TH CLIENTLIB 3
.SH NAME
clientlib \- NNTP clientlib part of InterNetNews library
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.ta \w'    unsigned long    'u
.B "extern FILE	*ser_rd_fp;"
.B "extern FILE	*ser_wr_fp;"
.B "extern char	ser_line[];"

.B "char *"
.B "getserverbyfile(file)"
.B "    char	*file;"

.B "int"
.B "server_init(host)"
.B "    char	*host;"

.B "int"
.B "handle_server_response(response, host)"
.B "    int	reponse;"
.B "    char	*host;"

.B "void"
.B "put_server(text)"
.B "    char	*text;"

.B "int"
.B "get_server(buff, buffsize)"
.B "    char	*buff;"
.B "    int	buffsize;"

.B "void"
.B "close_server()"
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The routines described in this manual page are part of the InterNetNews
library,
.IR libinn (3).
They are replacements for the ``clientlib'' part of the NNTP distribution,
and are intended to be used in building programs like
.IR rrn .
.PP
.I Getserverbyfile
calls
.I GetConfigValue
to get the name of the local NNTP server.
It returns a pointer to static space.
The
.I file
parameter is ignored.
.PP
.I Server_init
opens a connect to the NNTP server at the specified
.IR host .
It returns the server's response code or \-1 on error.
If a connection was made, then
.I ser_rd_fp
and
.I ser_wr_fp
can be used to read from and write to the server, respectively, and
.I ser_line
will contain the server's response.
.I Ser_line
can also be used in other routines.
.PP
.I Handle_server_response
decodes the
.IR response ,
which comes from the server on
.IR host.
If the client is authorized, it returns 0.
A client that is only allowed to read is authorized, but
.I handle_server_response
will print a message on the standard output.
If the client is not authorized to talk to the server, then a message is
printed and the routine returns \-1.
.PP
.I Put_server
sends the text in
.I buff
to the server, adding the necessary NNTP line terminators, and flushing
the I/O buffer.
.PP
.I Get_server
reads a line of text from the server into
.IR buff ,
reading at most
.I buffsize
characters.
Any trailing \er\en terminators are stripped off.
.I Get_server
returns \-1 on error.
.PP
.I Close_server
sends a ``quit'' command to the server and closes the connection.
.SH HISTORY
Written by Rich $alz <rsalz@uunet.uu.net> for InterNetNews.
.de R$
This is revision \\$3, dated \\$4.
..
.R$ $Id: clientlib.3,v 1.4 1992/04/03 06:28:02 rsalz Exp $
.SH "SEE ALSO"
libinn(3).
