.\" $Revision: 1.5 $
.TH GREPHISTORY 1
.SH NAME
grephistory \- display file names from Usenet history file
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B grephistory
[
.BI \-f " filename"
]
[
.B \-e
]
[
.B \-n
]
[
.B \-q
]
[
.B \-l
]
[
.B \-i
]
[
.B \-s
]
[
.I messageid
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Grephistory
queries the
.IR dbz (3)
index into the
.IR history (5)
file for an article having a specified Message-ID.
.PP
If
.I messageid
cannot be found in the database, the program prints ``Not found'' and
exits with a non-zero status.
If
.I messageid
is in the database, the program prints the pathname and exits successfully.
If no pathname exists, the program will print ``/dev/null'' and exit
successfully.
This can happen when an article has been cancelled, or if it has been
expired but its history is still retained.
This is default behaviour, which can be obtained by using the ``\-n'' flag.
.PP
If the ``\-q'' flag is used, then no message is displayed.
The program will still exit with the appropriate exit status.
If the ``\-e'' flag is used, then
.I grephistory
will only print the filename of an existing article.
.PP
If the ``\-l'' flag is used then the entire line from the history file will
be displayed.
.PP
If the ``\-i'' flag is used, then
.I grephistory
will read a list of Message-ID's on standard input, one per line.
Leading and trailing whitespace is ignored, as are any malformed lines.
It will print on standard output those Message-ID's which are not
found in the history database.
This flag is used in processsing ``ihave'' control messages.
.PP
If the ``\-s'' flag is used, then
.I grephistory
will read a similar list from its standard input.
It will print on standard output a list of filenames for each article
that is still available.
This flag is used in processsing ``sendme'' control messages.
.PP
To specify a different value for the history file and database, use
the ``\-f'' flag.
.SH HISTORY
Written by Rich $alz <rsalz@uunet.uu.net> for InterNetNews.
.de R$
This is revision \\$3, dated \\$4.
..
.R$ $Id: grephistory.1,v 1.5 1993/01/29 16:42:47 rsalz Exp $
.SH "SEE ALSO"
dbz(3),
history(5).
