.\" $Revision: 1.13 $
.TH MODERATORS 5
.SH NAME
moderators \- mail addresses for moderated Usenet newsgroups
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.IR GetModeratorAddress (3)
routine reads the file
.\" =()<.I @<_PATH_MODERATORS>@>()=
.I /var/spool/news/data/moderators
to determine how to reach the moderator of a newsgroup.
This is used by
.IR inews (1)
when an unapproved local posting is made to a moderated newsgroup.
.PP
The file is read until a match is found.
Blank lines and lines starting with a number sign (``#'') are ignored.
All other lines should consist of two fields separated by a colon.
.PP
The first field is a
.IR wildmat(3) -style
pattern.
If it matches the name of the newsgroup, then the second field is taken to
be a format string for
.IR sprintf (3).
This string should have at most one
.I %s
parameter, which will be given the name of the newsgroup with periods
transliterated to dashes.
.PP
Here is a sample file:
.RS
.nf
foo.important:announce-request@foo.com
foo.*:%s@mailer.foo.com
gnu.*:%s@prep.ai.mit.edu
*:%s@uunet.uu.net
.fi
.RE
Using the above file, postings to the moderated newsgroup in the left
column will be sent to the address shown in the right column:
.RS
.nf
.ta \w'gnu.emacs.sources   'u
foo.important	announce-request@foo.com
foo.x.announce	foo-x-announce@mailer.foo.com
gnu.emacs.sources	gnu-emacs-sources@prep.ai.mit.edu
comp.sources.unix	comp-sources-unix@uunet.uu.net
.fi
.RE
.SH HISTORY
Written by Rich $alz <rsalz@uunet.uu.net> for InterNetNews.
.de R$
This is revision \\$3, dated \\$4.
..
.R$ $Id: moderators.5,v 1.13 1993/01/29 16:43:02 rsalz Exp $
.SH "SEE ALSO"
inews(1), inn.conf(5), libinn(3), wildmat(3).
