.TH NEWSLOG 5
.SH NAME
newslog \- description of Usenet log files
.SH DESCRIPTION
Most log files created by Usenet programs reside in the
.\" =()<.I @<_PATH_MOST_LOGS>@>()=
.I /var/spool/news/data
directory and have a ``.log'' extension.
Several versions are usually kept with an additional extension such as ``.1'',
``.2'', etc. \(em the higher the number, the older the log.
The older versions are compressed.
.PP
The
.I scanlogs
script and related utilities (see
.IR newslog (8))
are responsible for rotating and compressing these files.
.PP
Some log files always have data, others only have data if there is a
problem, and others are only created if a particular program is used
or configuration parameter is set.
The
.I innstat
script (see
.IR newslog (8))
monitors the size of all log files.
.PP
The following files will only accumulate data under the direction of
.IR control.ctl (5):
.RS
control.log
miscctl.log
newgroup.log
rmgroup.log
unwanted.log
.RE
In order to create these files, the ``message'' and ``action'' fields of
.I control.ctl
should be chosen from the following table:
.RS
.nf
.ta \w'newgroup    'u +\w'doit=newgroup  'u
Message	Action	Meaning
all	log=miscctl	Log all messages by default
default	log=miscctl	Log unknown messages
newgroup	doit=newgroup	Create group and log message
newgroup	log=newgroup	Log message
rmgroup	doit=rmgroup	Remove group and log message
rmgroup	log=rmgroup	Log message
``other''	doit=miscctl	log and process the message
``other''	log=miscctl	Log message
.fi
.RE
Here, ``other'' refers to any other control message such as:
.RS
checkgroups
ihave
sendme
sendsys
senduuname
version
.RE
.PP
The following is a list of log files.
.TP
.I control.log
This file maintains a count of the number of newgroup and rmgroup control
messages seen for each newsgroup.
The count is of the number of control messages with identical
arguments, regardless if they were actually processed.
All control arguments, including invalid ones, are counted.
This file is updated by
.IR tally.control ,
which is invoked by
.I scanlogs
if either the newgroup or rmgroup logs exist.
This file is not rotated.
.TP
.I errlog
This file contains the standard output and standard error of any program
spawned by
.IR innd (8).
The most common programs are the control-message handlers found in
.\" =()<.IR @<_PATH_CONTROLPROGS>@ .>()=
.IR /var/spool/news/data/ctlbin .
This file should be empty.
.I Scanlogs
will print the entire contents of this log file if it is non-empty.
.TP
.I expire.log
By default, when
.I news.daily
is going to expire old news articles, it writes the date to this file,
followed by any output from
.IR expire (8)
and the ending date.
All lines but the first are indented four spaces.
.TP
.I miscctl.log
When
.I control.ctl
is configured as described above, all control messages except newgroup
and rmgroup are appended to this file by
.IR writelog .
There will be a summary line describing the message and the action
taken, followed by the article indented by four spaces, and a blank line.
.TP
.I newgroup.log
When
.I control.ctl
is configured as described above, all newgroup messages are appended
to this file using the same format as for
.IR miscctl.log .
.TP
.I news
This file logs articles received by
.IR innd .
.I Scanlogs
summarizes the rejected articles reported in this file.
.TP
.I news.crit
All critical error messages issued by
.I innd
are appended to this file via
.IR syslog (3).
This log file should be empty.
.I Scanlogs
will print the entire contents of this log file if it is non-empty.
You should have the following line in your
.IR syslog.conf (5)
file:
.RS
.RS
.\" =()<news.crit  @<_PATH_MOST_LOGS>@/news.crit>()=
news.crit  /var/spool/news/data/news.crit
.RE
.RE
.TP
.I news.err
All major error messages issued by
.I innd
are appended to this file via
.IR syslog .
This log file should be empty.
.I Scanlogs
will print the entire contents of this log file if it is non-empty.
You should have the following line in your
.I syslog.conf
file:
.RS
.RS
.\" =()<news.err  @<_PATH_MOST_LOGS>@/news.err>()=
news.err  /var/spool/news/data/news.err
.RE
.RE
.TP
.I news.notice
All standard error messages and status messages issued by
.I innd
are appended to this file via
.IR syslog .
.I Scanlogs
uses the
.IR awk (1)
script
.I innlog.awk
to summarize this file.
You should have the following line in your syslog.conf file:
.RS
.RS
.\" =()<news.notice  @<_PATH_MOST_LOGS>@/news.notice>()=
news.notice  /var/spool/news/data/news.notice
.RE
.RE
.TP
.I nntpsend.log
The
.IR nntpsend (8)
programs appends all status messages to this file.
.TP
.I rmgroup.log
When
.I control.ctl
is configured as described above, all rmgroup messages are appended to this
file using the same format as for
.IR miscctl.log .
.TP
.I unwanted.log
This log maintains a count of the number of articles that were rejected
because they were posted to newsgroups that do not exist at the local site.
This file is updated by
.I tally.unwanted
and maintained in reverse numeric order (the most popular rejected group
first).
This file is not rotated.
.SH HISTORY
Written by Landon Curt Noll <chongo@toad.com> and Rich $alz
<rsalz@uunet.uu.net> for InterNetNews.
.de R$
This is revision \\$3, dated \\$4.
..
.R$ $Id: newslog.5,v 1.3 1993/01/29 16:43:07 rsalz Exp $
.SH "SEE ALSO"
control.ctl(5),
ctlinnd(8),
expire(8),
innd(8),
news.daily(8),
nntpsend(8),
newslog(8).
