.\" $Revision: 1.8 $
.TH NNTPGET 1
.SH NAME
nntpget \- get Usenet articles from a remote NNTP server
.SH SYNOPSIS
.I nntpget
[
.BI \-d " dist"
]
[
.BI \-f " file"
]
[
.BI \-n " newsgroups"
]
[
.BI \-t " timestring"
]
[
.B \-o
]
[
.BI \-u " file"
]
[
.B \-v
]
.I host
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Nntpget
connects to the NNTP server at the specified
.I host
and retrieves articles from it.
The articles are sent to standard output.
.PP
The ``\-o'' flag may be used only if the command is executed on the
host where the
.IR innd (8)
server is running.
If this flag is used,
.I nntpget
connects to the specified remote
.I host
to retrieve articles.
Any article not present in the local
.I history
database is then fetched from the remote site and offered to the local server.
.PP
If the ``\-v'' flag is used with the ``\-o'' flag then each the Message-ID
of each article will be sent to standard output as it is processed.
.PP
The list of article Message-ID's is normally read from standard input.
If the ``\-f'' flag is used, then a ``newnews'' command is used to retrieve
all articles newer then the modification date of the specified
.IR file .
The ``\-u'' flag is the same except that if the transfer succeeded, the
file will be updated with a statistics line, modifying its timestamp so that
it can be used in later invocations.
If the ``\-t'' flag is used, then the specified
.I timestring
is used as the time and date parameter to the ``newnews'' command.
.PP
If either the ``\-t'' or ``\-f'' flags are used, then the ``\-n'' flag
may be used to specify a newsgroup list and the ``\-d'' flag may be
used to specify a distribution list.
The default is ``*'' for all newsgroups, and no distribution list.
.SH BUGS
Truncates articles at 512 lines.
.SH HISTORY
Written by Rich $alz <rsalz@uunet.uu.net> for InterNetNews.
.de R$
This is revision \\$3, dated \\$4.
..
.R$ $Id: nntpget.1,v 1.8 1993/03/18 21:03:45 rsalz Exp $
.SH "SEE ALSO"
innd(8).
