.\" Copyright (c) 1980 Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.  The Berkeley software License Agreement
.\" specifies the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.\"
.\"	@(#)ms.7	6.2 (Berkeley) 5/2/88
.\"
.TH MS 7 "May 2, 1988"
.UC 4
.ds ]W UCB Computer Center
.SH NAME
ms \- text formatting macros
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBnroff  \-ms\fP  [ options ]  file  ...
.br
\fBtroff  \-ms\fP  [ options ]  file  ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
This package of \fInroff\fP\| and \fItroff\fP\|
macro definitions provides a formatting facility
for various styles of articles, theses, and books.
When producing 2-column output on a terminal or lineprinter,
or when reverse line motions are needed,
filter the output through \fIcol\fP\|(1).
All external \-ms macros are defined below.
Many \fInroff\fP\| and \fItroff\fP\| requests
are unsafe in conjunction with this package.
However, the first four requests below
may be used with impunity after initialization,
and the last two may be used even before initialization:
.sp .2
.ta 5n 12n
.nf
	.bp	begin new page
	.br	break output line
	.sp n	insert n spacing lines
	.ce n	center next n lines
	.ls n	line spacing: n=1 single, n=2 double space
	.na	no alignment of right margin
.fi
.sp .2
Font and point size changes with \ef and \es are also allowed;
for example, ``\efIword\efR'' will italicize \fIword.\fP
Output of the \fItbl, eqn,\fP and \fIrefer\fP\|(1) preprocessors
for equations, tables, and references is acceptable as input.
.SH FILES
/usr/lib/tmac/tmac.x
.br
/usr/lib/ms/x.???
.SH "SEE ALSO"
eqn(1), refer(1), tbl(1), troff(1)
.SH REQUESTS
.if n .in 0
.ds x \fIx\fP\|
.ds y \fIy\fP\|
.ds z \fI y\fP
.ds Y \fIx y\fP
.tr _.
.ta \w'MacroNam'u +\w'InitialVal'u +\w'Break? 'u
.sp .3
.nf
Macro	Initial	Break?	\0 Explanation
Name	Value	Reset?
.sp .3
_AB \*x	\-	y	begin abstract; if \*x=no don't label abstract
_AE	\-	y	end abstract
_AI	\-	y	author's institution
_AM	\-	n	better accent mark definitions
_AU	\-	y	author's name
_B \*x	\-	n	embolden \*x; if no \*x, switch to boldface
_B1	\-	y	begin text to be enclosed in a box
_B2	\-	y	end boxed text and print it
_BT	date	n	bottom title, printed at foot of page
_BX \*x	\-	n	print word \*x in a box
_CM	if t	n	cut mark between pages
_CT	\-	y,y	chapter title: page number moved to CF (TM only)
_DA \*x	if n	n	force date \*x at bottom of page; today if no \*x
_DE	\-	y	end display (unfilled text) of any kind
_DS \*Y	I	y	begin display with keep; \*x=I,L,C,B; \*y=indent 
_ID\*z	8n,.5i	y	indented display with no keep; \*y=indent
_LD	\-	y	left display with no keep
_CD	\-	y	centered display with no keep
_BD	\-	y	block display; center entire block
_EF \*x	\-	n	even page footer \*x (3 part as for .tl)
_EH \*x	\-	n	even page header \*x (3 part as for .tl)
_EN	\-	y	end displayed equation produced by \fIeqn\fP
_EQ \*Y	\-	y	break out equation; \*x=L,I,C; \*y=equation number
_FE	\-	n	end footnote to be placed at bottom of page
_FP	\-	n	numbered footnote paragraph; may be redefined
_FS \*x	\-	n	start footnote; \*x is optional footnote label
_HD	undef	n	optional page header below header margin
_I \*x	\-	n	italicize \*x; if no \*x, switch to italics
_IP \*Y	\-	y,y	indented paragraph, with hanging tag \*x; \*y=indent
_IX \*Y	\-	y	index words \*x \*y and so on (up to 5 levels)
_KE	\-	n	end keep of any kind
_KF	\-	n	begin floating keep; text fills remainder of page
_KS	\-	y	begin keep; unit kept together on a single page
_LG	\-	n	larger; increase point size by 2
_LP	\-	y,y	left (block) paragraph.
_MC \*x	\-	y,y	multiple columns; \*x=column width
_ND \*x	if t	n	no date in page footer; \*x is date on cover
_NH \*Y	\-	y,y	numbered header; \*x=level, \*x=0 resets, \*x=S sets to \*y
_NL	10p	n	set point size back to normal
_OF \*x	\-	n	odd page footer \*x (3 part as for .tl)
_OH \*x	\-	n	odd page header \*x (3 part as for .tl)
_P1	if TM	n	print header on 1st page
_PP	\-	y,y	paragraph with first line indented
_PT	- % -	n	page title, printed at head of page
_PX \*x	\-	y	print index (table of contents); \*x=no suppresses title
_QP	\-	y,y	quote paragraph (indented and shorter)
_R	on	n	return to Roman font
_RE	5n	y,y	retreat: end level of relative indentation
_RP \*x	\-	n	released paper format; \*x=no stops title on 1st page
_RS	5n	y,y	right shift: start level of relative indentation
_SH	\-	y,y	section header, in boldface
_SM	\-	n	smaller; decrease point size by 2
_TA	8n,5n	n	set tabs to 8n 16n ... (nroff) 5n 10n ... (troff)
_TC \*x	\-	y	print table of contents at end; \*x=no suppresses title
_TE	\-	y	end of table processed by \fItbl\fP
_TH	\-	y	end multi-page header of table
_TL	\-	y	title in boldface and two points larger
_TM	off	n	UC Berkeley thesis mode
_TS \*x	\-	y,y	begin table; if \*x=H table has multi-page header
_UL \*x	\-	n	underline \*x, even in \fItroff\fP
_UX \*x	\-	n	UNIX; trademark message first time; \*x appended
_XA \*Y	\-	y	another index entry; \*x=page or no for none; \*y=indent
_XE	\-	y	end index entry (or series of .IX entries)
_XP	\-	y,y	paragraph with first line exdented, others indented
_XS \*Y	\-	y	begin index entry; \*x=page or no for none; \*y=indent
_1C	on	y,y	one column format, on a new page
_2C	\-	y,y	begin two column format
_]-	\-	n	beginning of \fIrefer\fP\| reference
_[0	\-	n	end of unclassifiable type of reference
_[N	\-	n	N= 1:journal-article, 2:book, 3:book-article, 4:report
.fi
.if t .bp
.DT
.SH REGISTERS
Formatting distances can be controlled in \-ms
by means of built-in number registers.
For example, this sets the line length to 6.5 inches:
.sp .3
	.nr  LL  6.5i
.sp .3
Here is a table of number registers and their default values:
.sp .3
.nf
.ta .5i +\w'Name\0'u +\w'paragraph distance 'u +\w'Takes Effect 'u
	Name	Register Controls	Takes Effect	Default
.sp .3
	PS	point size      	paragraph	10
	VS	vertical spacing	paragraph	12
	LL	line length     	paragraph	6i
	LT	title length    	next page	same as LL
	FL	footnote length 	next .FS	5.5i
	PD	paragraph distance	paragraph	1v (if n), .3v (if t)
	DD	display distance	displays	1v (if n), .5v (if t)
	PI	paragraph indent	paragraph	5n
	QI	quote indent    	next .QP	5n
	FI	footnote indent 	next .FS	2n
	PO	page offset     	next page	0 (if n), \(ap1i (if t)
	HM	header margin   	next page	1i
	FM	footer margin   	next page	1i
	FF	footnote format 	next .FS	0 (1, 2, 3 available)
.fi
.sp .3
When resetting these values,
make sure to specify the appropriate units.
Setting the line length to 7, for example,
will result in output with one character per line.
Setting FF to 1 suppresses footnote superscripting;
setting it to 2 also suppresses indentation of the first line;
and setting it to 3 produces an .IP-like footnote paragraph.
.PP
Here is a list of string registers available in \-ms;
they may be used anywhere in the text:
.sp .3
.nf
.ta .5i 1.1i
	Name	String's Function
.sp .3
	\e*Q	quote (" in \fInroff,\fP\| `` in \fItroff\fP )
	\e*U 	unquote (" in \fInroff,\fP\| '' in \fItroff\fP )
	\e*\-	dash (-- in \fInroff,\fP \(em in \fItroff\fP )
	\e*(MO	month (month of the year)
	\e*(DY	day (current date)
	\e**	automatically numbered footnote
	\e*[	opening footnote string delimiter
	\e*]	closing footnote string delimiter
	\e*([.	opening reference tag delimiter
	\e*(.]	closing reference tag delimiter
	\e*\'	acute accent (before letter)
	\e*\`	grave accent (before letter)
	\e*\d^	\ucircumflex (before letter)
	\e*,	cedilla (before letter)
	\e*:	umlaut (before letter)
	\e*\d~	\utilde (before letter)
.fi
.sp .3
The opening and closing delimiters for footnote numbers
and reference tags may be changed by resetting the appropriate string.
Both opening delimiters change to italics and superscript in \fItroff\fP,
reverting to the previous font and the baseline at the closing delimiter.
In \fInroff\fP, square brackets are used as delimiters, with footnote
numbers in italics.
.PP
When using the extended accent mark definitions available with .AM,
these strings should come after, rather than before,
the letter to be accented.
.SH BUGS
Floating keeps and regular keeps are diverted to the same space,
so they cannot be mixed together with predictable results.
