.TH RCSFREEZE 1L "" "Purdue University"
.SH NAME
rcsfreeze \- freeze a configuration of sources checked in under RCS
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rcsfreeze
[symbolic revision name]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I rcsfreeze
command has the purpose of assigning a symbolic revision
number to a set of RCS files, which form a valid configuration.
.PP
The idea is to run
.I rcsfreeze
each time a new version is checked
in. A unique symbolic revision number (\c
.BI C_ number,
where
.I number
is increased each time rcsfreeze is run) is then assigned to the most
recent revision of each RCS file of the main trunk.
.PP
If the command is invoked with an argument, then this
argument is used as the symbolic name to freeze a configuration.
The unique identifier is still generated
and is listed in the log file but it will not appear as
part of the symbolic revision name in the actual RCS files.
.PP
A log message is requested from the user which is saved for future
references.
.PP
The shell script works only on all RCS files at one time.
It is important that all changed files are checked in (there are
no precautions against any error in this respect). Run
.IR rcsclean (1L)
first and see whether any sources remain in the current directory.
.SH FILES
.TP 2.5i
[RCS/]rcsfreeze.version
for the version number
.TP
[RCS/]rscfreeze.log
for the log messages, most recent log message first.
.SH AUTHOR
Stephan v. Bechtolsheim
.SH "SEE ALSO"
rcs(1L), rlog(1L), rcsclean(1L)
.SH BUGS
The program does not check whether there are any sources checked out
and modified.
