.TH LPR 1 "25 February 1983"
.UC 4
.ad
.SH NAME
lpr \- off line print
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B lpr
[\-Pprinter] [\-#num] [\-C class] [\-J job] [\-T title] [-i [numcols]]
[\-w#] [\-pltvcrmhs] [name ...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B lpr
uses a spooling daemon to print the named files when facilities
become available.  If no names appear, the standard input is assumed.
The
.B \-P
option may be used to force output to a specific printer.  Normally,
the default printer is used (site dependent), or the value of the
environment variable PRINTER is used.
.PP
The single letter options have the following meaning:
.IP \-p 5
Use
.IR pr (1)
to format the files (equivalent to
.IR print ).
.IP \-l 5
Use a filter which allows control characters to be printed and supresses
page breaks.
.IP \-t 5
The files are assumed to contain data from
.IR troff (1).
.IP \-v 5
The files are assumed to contain data from
.IR vplot (1).
.IP \-c 5
The files are assumed to contain data produced by
.I cifplot.
.IP \-r 5
Remove the file upon completion of spooling.
.IP \-m 5
Send mail upon completion.
.IP \-h 5
Suppress the printing of the burst page.
.IP \-s 5
Use symbolic links. Usually files are copied to the spool directory.
.PP 
The
.B \-C
option takes the following argument as a classification
for use on the burst page.  For example,
.PP
.ti +0.5i
lpr \-C ``Lincoln Labs" foo.c
.PP
would cause the system name to be replaced on the burst page by 
.IR "Lincoln Labs" ,
and the file foo.c to be printed.
.PP
The
.B \-J
option takes the following argument as the job name to print on the burst page.
Normally, the first file name is used.
.PP
The
.B \-T
option uses the next argument as the title used by
.IR pr (1)
instead of the file name.
.PP
To get multiple copies of output, use the
.B \-#num
option,
where
.B num
is the number of copies desired of each file named.  For example,
.PP
.ti +0.5i
lpr -#3 foo.c bar.c more.c
.PP
would result in 3 copies of the file foo.c, followed by 3 copies
of the file bar.c, etc.  On the other hand, 
.PP
.ti +0.5i
cat foo.c bar.c more.c | lpr -#3
.PP
will give three copies of the concatenation of the files.
.PP
The
.B \-i
option causes the output to be indented. If the next argument
is numeric, it is used as the number of blanks to be printed before each
line; otherwise, 8 characters are printed.
.PP
.B \-w
option takes the number following the `w' to be the page width for
.I pr.
.PP
The
.B \-s
option will use
.IR symlink (2)
to link data files rather than trying to copy them so large files can be
printed.  This means the files should
not be modified or removed until they have been printed.
.SH FILES
.nf
.ta \w'/usr/spool/*/cf*       'u
/etc/passwd	personal identification
/etc/printcap	printer capabilities data base
/usr/lib/lpd*	line printer daemons
/usr/spool/*	directories used for spooling
/usr/spool/*/cf*	daemon control files
/usr/spool/*/df*	data files specified in "cf" files
/usr/spool/*/tf*	temproary copies of "cf" files
.fi
.SH "SEE ALSO"
lpq(1),
lprm(1),
pr(1),
symlink(2),
printcap(5),
lpd(8)
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
If you try to spool too large a file, it will be truncated.
.I lpr
will object to printing binary files.
Diagnostics may be printed in the daemon's log file
regarding missing spool files by
.IR lpd (8).
.SH BUGS
Currently the -i option is not implemented.
