.TH RLOGIN 1C "10 February 1983"
.UC 4
.SH NAME
rlogin \- remote login
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rlogin
rhost [
\fB\-e\fR\fI\|c\fR
] [
.B \-l
username ]
.br
rhost [
\fB\-e\fR\fI\|c\fR
] [
.B \-l
username ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Rlogin
connects your terminal on the current local host system
.I lhost
to the remote host system
.I rhost.
.PP
Each host has a file
.I /etc/hosts.equiv
which contains a list of \fIrhost\fR's which which it shares account names.
(The host names must be the standard names as described in
.IR rsh (1c)
and printed by
.IR login (1).)
When you
.I rlogin
as the same user on an equivalent host, you don't need
to give a password.
Each user may also have a private equivalence list in a file \&.rhosts
in his login directory.  Each line in this file should contain a \fIrhost\fP
and a \fIusername\fP separated by a space, giving additional cases
where logins without passwords are to be permitted.
If the originating user is not equivalent to the remote user, then
a login and password will be prompted for on the remote machine as in
.IR login (1).
.PP
Your remote terminal type is the same as your local
terminal type (as given in your environment TERM variable).
All echoing takes place at the remote site, so that (except for
delays) the rlogin is transparent.  Flow control via ^S and ^Q and
flushing of input and output on interrupts are handled properly.
A line of the form ``~.'' disconnects from the remote host, where
``~'' is the escape character.  A different escape character may
be specified by the
.B \-e
option.
.SH SEE ALSO
rsh(1c)
.SH FILES
/usr/hosts/*		for \fIrhost\fP version of the command
.SH BUGS
More terminal characteristics should be propagated.
