.TH BUGFILER 8 "18 July 1983"
.UC 4
.SH NAME
bugfiler \- file bug reports in folders automatically
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bugfiler
[ mail directory ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Bugfiler
is a program to automatically intercept bug reports, summarize them and
store them in the appropriate sub directories of the mail directory
specified on the command line or the (system dependent) default.
It is designed to be compatible with the Rand MH mail system.
.I Bugfiler
is normally invoked by the mail delivery program through
.IR aliases (5)
with a line such as the following in /usr/lib/aliases.
.PP
.DT
	bugs:"|bugfiler /usr/bugs/mail"
.PP
It reads the message from the standard input or the named file, checks
the format and returns mail acknowledging receipt or a message 
indicating the proper format.  Valid reports are then summarized and
filed in the appropriate folder.  Users can then log onto the system and
check the summary file for bugs that pertain to them.
Bug reports are submitted in RFC822 format and
must contain the following header lines:
.PP
.DT
	Date: <date the report is received>
.br
	From: <valid return address>
.br
	Subject: <short summary of the problem>
.br
	Index: <source directory>/<source file> <version> [Fix]
.PP
In addition, the body of the message must contain a line which
begins with ``Description:'' followed by zero or more lines describing the
problem in detail and a line beginning with ``Repeat-By:'' followed by zero or
more lines describing how to repeat the problem.
If the keyword `Fix' is specified in the `Index' line, then there must
also be a line beginning with ``Fix:'' followed by a diff of the old and new
source files or a description of what was done to fix the problem.
.PP
The `Index' line is the key to the filing mechanism. The source directory
name must match one of the folder names in the mail directory.
The message is then filed in this folder
and a line appended to the summary file in the following format:
.PP
.DT
	<folder name>/<message number>	<Index info>
.br
						<Subject info>
.SH FILES
.ta 2.5i
/usr/new/lib/mh/deliver	mail delivery program
.br
/usr/new/lib/mh/unixtomh	converts unix mail format to mh format
.br
maildir/.ack	the message sent in acknowledgement
.br
maildir/.format	the message sent when format errors are detected
.br
maildir/summary	the summary file
.br
maildir/Bf??????	temporary copy of the input message
.br
maildir/Rp??????	temporary file for the reply message.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
mh(1),
newaliases(1),
aliases(5)
.SH BUGS
.PP
Since mail can be forwarded in a number of different ways,
.I bugfiler
does not recognize forwarded mail and will reply/complain to the
forwarder instead of the original sender unless there is a `Reply-To'
field in the header.
.PP
Duplicate messages should be discarded or recognized and put somewhere
else.
