.TH FGET.DEMON 8 
.SH NAME
fget.demon, fget.odemon \- fget daemons
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B /etc/fget.demon
time
.br
.B /etc/fget.odemon
time
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Fget.demon
and
.I fget.odemon
are daemons for the 210 dataphone or spider.
They are designed to retrieve files
that have been requested by
.IR fget (1)
from the Honeywell 6070 computer.
The argument
.I time
is the number of seconds for
.I fget.demon
to wait for files to appear from GRTS.
The default is 6 minutes.
.I Fget.demon
is automatically initiated by
.I fget,
and by
.I cron (1).
.PP
On systems with both a spider and a dataphone connection to
the Honeywell 6070 computer,
.I fget.demon
uses spider, and
.I fget.odemon
uses the dataphone,
and is called automatically as a backup
when the spider connection is down.
On other systems, there is only one fget daemon,
.I fget.demon,
which use the dataphone.
.PP
The daemons
use the spooling directory
.I /usr/dpd.
The file
.I glock
in that directory
is used
to prevent two daemons from becoming active.
After the program has successfully set the lock,
it forks and the main path exits, thus
spawning the daemon.
GRTS is interrogated for any output for the daemon's station-id.
If none,
.I fget.demon
will wait up to
.I time
seconds,
interrogating GRTS every minute or so to see if any output has arrived.
All problems and successful transactions are recorded
in the 
.I errors
file in the spooling directory.
.PP
To restart
.I fget.demon
(in the case of hardware or software malfunction),
it is necessary to first kill the old
.I fget.demon
(if still alive),
and remove the lock file
before initiating
.I fget.demon.
This is done automatically when the system is brought up,
by
.I /etc/rc
(see
.IR init (1))
in case there are any jobs waiting to come over.
.SH FILES
.ta \w'/dev/tiu/d2  '
/usr/dpd/*
spool area
.br
/dev/du*
dataphone device
.br
/dev/dn*
acu device
.br
/dev/tiu/d2
spider device
.SH "SEE ALSO"
fget(1), dpd(1)
