.\" Copyright (c) 1985 Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.  The Berkeley software License Agreement
.\" specifies the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.\"
.\"	@(#)named.8	6.2 (Berkeley) 6/3/86
.\"
.TH NAMED 8 "15 November 1985"
.UC 4
.SH NAME
named \- Internet domain name server
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B named
[
.B \-d
.I debuglevel
] [
.B \-p
.I port#
] [
.I bootfile
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Named
is the Internet domain name server (see RFC883 for more details).
Without any arguments,
.I named
will read the default boot file
.IR /etc/named.boot ,
read any initial data and listen for queries.
.PP
Options are:
.TP
.B \-d
Print debugging information.
A number after the ``d'' determines the level of
messages printed.
.TP
.B \-p
Use a different port number.  The default is the standard port number
as listed in /etc/services.
.PP
Any additional argument is taken as the name of the boot file.
The boot file contains information about where the name server is to get
its initial data.
The following is a small example:
.RS
.nf

;
;	boot file for name server
;
; type		domain		source file or host
;
domain		berkeley.edu
primary		berkeley.edu    named.db
secondary 	cc.berkeley.edu 10.2.0.78 128.32.0.10
cache		.               named.ca	

.fi
.RE
The first line specifies that ``berkeley.edu'' is the domain for which
the server is authoritative.
The second line states that the file ``named.db'' contains
authoritative data for the domain ``berkeley.edu''. The file ``named.db''
contains data in the master file format described in RFC883 except that
all domain names are relative to the origin; in this
case, ``berkeley.edu'' (see below for a more detailed description).
The second line specifies that all authoritative data
under ``cc.berkeley.edu'' is to be transferred from the name server
at 10.2.0.78.  If the transfer fails it will try 128.32.0.10 and
continue trying the address, up to 10, listed on this line.
The secondary copy is also authoritative for the specified domain.
The fourth line specifies data in ``named.ca'' is to be placed in the cache
(i.e., well known data such as locations of root domain servers).
The file ``named.ca'' is in the same format as ``named.db''.
.PP
The master file consists of entries of the form:
.RS
.nf

$INCLUDE <filename>
$ORIGIN <domain>
<domain> <opt_ttl> <opt_class> <type> <resource_record_data>

.fi
.RE
where
.I domain
is "." for root, "@" for the current origin, or a standard domain
name. If
.I domain
is a standard domain name that does not end with ``.'', the current origin
is appended to the domain. Domain names ending with ``.'' are
unmodified.
The
.I opt_ttl
field is an optional integer number for the time-to-live field.
It defaults to zero.
The
.I opt_class
field is the object address type; currently only one type is supported,
.BR IN ,
for objects connected to the DARPA Internet. 
The
.I type
field is one of the following tokens; the data expected in the
.I resource_record_data
field is in parentheses.
.TP "\w'MINFO    'u"
A
a host address (dotted quad)
.IP NS
an authoritative name server (domain)
.IP MX
a mail exchanger (domain)
.IP CNAME
the canonical name for an alias (domain)
.IP SOA
marks the start of a zone of authority (5 numbers (see RFC883))
.IP MB
a mailbox domain name (domain)
.IP MG
a mail group member (domain)
.IP MR
a mail rename domain name (domain)
.IP NULL
a null resource record (no format or data)
.IP WKS
a well know service description (not implemented yet)
.IP PTR
a domain name pointer (domain)
.IP HINFO
host information (cpu_type OS_type)
.IP MINFO
mailbox or mail list information (request_domain error_domain)
.SH NOTES
The following signals have the specified effect when sent to the
server process using the
.IR kill (1)
command.
.TP "\w'SIGUSR2   'u"
SIGHUP
Causes server to read named.boot and reload database.
.IP SIGINT
Dumps current data base and cache to /usr/tmp/named_dump.db
.IP SIGUSR1
Turns on debugging; each SIGUSR1 increments debug level.
.IP SIGUSR2
Turns off debugging completely.
.SH FILES
.nf
.ta \w'/usr/tmp/named_dump.db   'u
/etc/named.boot	name server configuration boot file
/etc/named.pid	the process id
/usr/tmp/named.run	debug output
/usr/tmp/named_dump.db	dump of the name servers database
.fi
.SH "SEE ALSO"
kill(1), gethostbyname(3N), signal(3c), resolver(3), resolver(5),
RFC882, RFC883, RFC973, RFC974,
\fIName Server Operations Guide for BIND\fR
