.TH NEWFS 8 "20 February 1983"
.UC 4
.SH NAME
newfs \- construct a new file system
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B /etc/newfs
[
.B \-v
] [
.B \-n
] [
.B mkfs-options
]
.B special disk-type
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Newfs
is a ``friendly'' front-end to the
.IR mkfs (8)
program.
.I Newfs
will look up the type of disk a file system is
being created on in the disk description
file
.IR /etc/disktab ,
calculate the appropriate
parameters to use in calling
.IR mkfs ,
then build the file system by forking 
.I mkfs 
and, if the file system is a root partition,
install the necessary bootstrap programs
in the initial 8 sectors of the device.
The
.B \-n
option prevents the 
bootstrap programs from being installed.
.PP
If the 
.B \-v
option is supplied, 
.I newfs
will print out its actions, including
the parameters passed to
.IR mkfs .
.PP
Options which may be used to override default
parameters passed to
.I mkfs
are:
.TP 10
.B \-s size
The size of the file system in sectors.
.TP 10
.B \-b block-size
The block size of the file system in bytes.  
.TP 10
.B \-f frag-size
The fragment size of the file system in bytes.
.TP 10
.B \-t #tracks/cylinder
.TP 10
.B \-c #cylinders/group
The number of cylinders per cylinder group in a file system.
The default value used is 16.
.TP 10
.B \-m free space %
The percentage of space reserved from normal users; the minimum
free space threshhold.  The default value used is 10%.
.TP 10
.B \-r revolutions/minute
The speed of the disk in revolutions per minute (normally 3600).
.TP 10
.B \-S sector-size
The size of a sector in bytes (almost never anything but 512).
.TP 10
.B \-i number of bytes per inode
This specifies the density of inodes in the file system.
The default is to create an inode for each 2048 bytes of data space.
If fewer inodes are desired, a larger number should be used;
to create more inodes a smaller number should be given.
.SH FILES
/etc/disktab	for disk geometry and file system partition information 
.br
/etc/mkfs	to actually build the file system
.br
/usr/mdec	for boot strapping programs
.SH "SEE ALSO"
disktab(5),
fs(5),
diskpart(8),
fsck(8),
format(8),
mkfs(8),
tunefs(8)
.PP
McKusick, Joy, Leffler; "A Fast File System for Unix",
Computer Systems Research Group, Dept of EECS, Berkeley, CA 94720;
TR #7, September 1982.
.SH BUGS
Should figure out the type of the disk without the user's help.
