.\" Copyright (c) 1980, 1990, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" %sccs.include.proprietary.roff%
.\"
.\"	@(#)term.7	8.1 (Berkeley) %G%
.\"
.Dd 
.Dt TERM 7
.Os ATT 32v
.Sh NAME
.Nm term
.Nd conventional names for terminals
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Certain commands use these terminal names. They are maintained
as part of the shell environment (see
.Xr sh  1  ,
.Xr environ  7  ) .
.Pp
.Ds I
.Cw network
.Cl adm3a	Lear Seigler Adm-3a
.Cl 2621	Hewlett-Packard HP262? series terminals
.Cl hp	Hewlett-Packard HP264? series terminals
.Cl c100	Human Designed Systems Concept 100
.Cl h19	Heathkit H19
.Cl mime	Microterm mime in enhanced ACT IV mode
.Cl 735	Texas Instruments TI735 (and TI725)
.Cl 745	Texas Instruments TI745
.Cl dumb	terminals with no special features
.Cl dialup	a terminal on a phone line with no known characteristics
.Cl network	a terminal on a network connection with no known characteristics
.Cl xterm	a workstation running X
.Cl 4014	Tektronix 4014
.Cl vt100	Digital Equipment Corp. VT100
.Cw
.De
.Pp
The list goes on and on.
Consult
.Pa /usr/share/misc/termcap (see
.Xr termcap  5  )
for an up-to-date and locally correct list.
.Pp
Commands whose behavior may depend on the terminal either consult TERM in
the environment, or accept arguments of the form
.Fl Tterm ,
where
.Nm term
is one of the names given above.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr stty 1 ,
.Xr tabs 1 ,
.Xr plot 1
.Xr sh 1 ,
.Xr environ 7
.Xr ex 1 ,
.Xr clear 1 ,
.Xr more 1 ,
.Xr ul 1 ,
.Xr tset 1 ,
.Xr termcap 5 ,
.Xr termcap 3 ,
.Xr ttys 5
.Xr troff 1
.Sh BUGS
The programs that ought to adhere to this nomenclature do so only fitfully.
.Sh HISTORY
.Nm Term
appeared in Version 32 AT&T UNIX.
