.\" Copyright (c) 1990, 1991 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to Berkeley by
.\" the Systems Programming Group of the University of Utah Computer
.\" Science Department.
.\" %sccs.include.redist.man%
.\"
.\"     @(#)ct.4	8.1 (Berkeley) %G%
.\"
.Dd 
.Dt CT 4 hp300
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm \&ct
.Nd
.Tn CS/80
cartridge tape interface
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "tape ct0 at hpib? slave ?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The cartridge tape interface as found in the 7946 and 9144 products
provides a standard tape drive interface as described in
.Xr mtio 4
with the following exceptions:
.Bl -enum
.It
There is only one density.
.It
Only the
.Dq raw
interface is supported.
.It
The
.Dv MTIOCTOP
.Xr ioctl 2
is limited.
In particular, the command,
.Dv MTFSR
is not supported.
.It
The
.Dv MTIOCGET
.Xr ioctl
is not supported.
.It
The record size for read and write operations must be between
1K and 64K inclusive.
.El
.Pp
Special files
.Pa rct0
through
.Pa rct3
refer to rewind on close interfaces to drives 0 to 3.
Files
.Pa rct4
through
.Pa rct7
refer to no-rewind interfaces.
Files
.Pa rct8
through
.Pa rct11
refer to streaming rewind on close interfaces. (Only 9144 type devices
can stream.)
Lastly,
.Pa rct12
through
.Pa rct15
refer to streaming no-rewind interfaces.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr mt 1 ,
.Xr tar 1 ,
.Xr tp 1 ,
.Xr mtio 4 .
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm \&ct
driver
.Ud
.Sh BUGS
Read and writes of less than 1024 bytes will not behave as expected.
