.\" Copyright (c) 1990 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to Berkeley by
.\" the Systems Programming Group of the University of Utah Computer
.\" Science Department.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms are permitted provided
.\" that: (1) source distributions retain this entire copyright notice and
.\" comment, and (2) distributions including binaries display the following
.\" acknowledgement:  ``This product includes software developed by the
.\" University of California, Berkeley and its contributors'' in the
.\" documentation or other materials provided with the distribution and in
.\" all advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software.
.\" Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors may
.\" be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\" specific prior written permission.
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'' AND WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.\"
.\"	@(#)rb.4	5.1 (Berkeley) 6/29/90
.\"
.TH RB 4 "June 29, 1990"
.UC 7
.SH NAME
rb \- HP98720 ``Renaissance'' device interface
.SH DESCRIPTION
This driver is for the HP98720 and 98721 graphics device, also known as
the Renaissance.  This driver has not been tested with all possible
combinations of frame buffer boards and scan boards installed in the device.
The driver merely checks for the existence of the device and does minimal set
up.
.PP
The Renaissance can be configured at either the ``internal'' address
(frame buffer address 0x200000, control register space address 0x560000)
or at an external select code less than 32.
At the internal address it will be the ``preferred'' console device
(see
.IR cons (4)).
The hardware installation manual describes the procedure for
setting these values.
.PP
A user process communicates to the device initially by means of
.IR ioctl (2)
calls.  For the HP-UX ioctl calls supported, refer to HP-UX manuals.
The BSD calls supported are:
.TP
GRFIOCGINFO
Get Graphics Info
.sp
Get info about device, setting the entries in the
.I grfinfo
structure, as defined in <hpdev/grfioctl.h>.
For the standard 98720, the number of planes should be 4.  The number of
colors would therefore be 15, excluding black.  If one 98722A frame buffer
board is installed, there will still be 4 planes, with the 4 planes on the
colormap board becoming overlay planes.  With each additional 98722 frame
buffer board 4 planes will be added up to a maximum of 32 planes total.
.TP
GRFIOCON
Graphics On
.sp
Turn graphics on by enabling CRT output.  The screen will come on, displaying
whatever is in the frame buffer, using whatever colormap is in place.
.TP
GRFIOCOFF
Graphics Off
.sp
Turn graphics off by disabling output to the CRT.  The frame buffer contents
are not affected.
.TP
GRFIOCMAP
Map Device to user space
.sp
Map in control registers and framebuffer space. Once the device file is
mapped, the frame buffer structure is accessible.  The structure describing
the 98720 is defined in <hpdev/grf_rbreg.h>.
.SH EXAMPLE
This is a short segment of code showing how the device is opened and mapped
into user process address space assuming that it is grf0:
.DS
{
    struct rboxfb *rbox;
    u_char *Addr, frame_buffer;
    struct grfinfo gi;
    int disp_fd;

      disp_fd = open("/dev/grf0",1);

      if (ioctl (disp_fd, GRFIOCGINFO, &gi) < 0) return -1;

      (void) ioctl (disp_fd, GRFIOCON, 0);

      Addr = (u_char *) 0;
      if (ioctl (disp_fd, GRFIOCMAP, &Addr) < 0) {
           (void) ioctl (disp_fd, GRFIOCOFF, 0);
           return -1;
      }
      rbox = (rboxfb *) Addr;                         /* Control Registers   */
      frame_buffer = (u_char *) Addr + gi.gd_regsize; /* Frame buffer memory */
}
.DE
.SH SEE ALSO
ioctl(2), grf(4).
.br
For extensive code examples using the
Renaissance, see the X device dependent source.
.SH FILES
.ta \w'/dev/crt98720, /dev/ocrt98720  'u
/dev/grf?	BSD special file
.br
/dev/crt98720, /dev/ocrt98720  HP-UX \fIstarbase\fP special files
.br
/dev/MAKEDEV.hpux	script for creating HP-UX special files
.SH ERRORS
.TP 15
[ENODEV]
no such device.
.TP 15
[EBUSY]
Another process has the device open.
.TP 15
[EINVAL]
Invalid ioctl specification.
.SH BUGS
Not tested for all configurations of scan board and frame buffer memory boards.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
None under BSD.
.br
HP-UX CE.utilities must be used.
