.\" Copyright (c) 1989, 1990 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)man.1	6.14 (Berkeley) 4/29/91
.\"
.Dd April 29, 1991
.Dt MAN 1
.Os BSD 4
.Sh NAME
.Nm man
.Nd display the on-line manual pages
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm man
.Op Fl achw
.Op Fl M Ar path
.Op Fl m Ar path
.Op Ar section
.Ar name Ar ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm man
utility
displays the
.Bx
manual pages entitled
.Ar name .
.Pp
The options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl a
Display all of the manual pages for a specified
.Ar section
and
.Ar name
combination.
(Normally, only the first manual page found is displayed.)
.It Fl c
Copy the manual page to the standard output instead of using
.Xr more 1
to paginate it.
This is done by default if the standard output is not a terminal device.
.It Fl h
Display only the
.Dq Tn SYNOPSIS
lines of the requested manual pages.
.It Fl M
Override the list of standard directories which
.Nm man
searches for manual pages.
The supplied
.Ar path
must be a colon (``:'') separated list of directories.
This search path may also be set using the environment variable
.Ev MANPATH .
The subdirectories to be searched as well as their search order
is specified by the ``_subdir'' line in the
.Nm man
configuration file.
.It Fl m
Augment the list of standard directories which
.Nm man
searches for manual pages.
The supplied
.Ar path
must be a colon (``:'') separated list of directories.
These directories will be searched before the standard directories or
the directories specified using the
.Fl M
option or the
.Ev MANPATH
environment variable.
.It Fl w
List the pathnames of the manual pages which
.Nm man
would display for the specified
.Ar section
and
.Ar name
combination.
.El
.Pp
The optional
.Ar section
restricts the directories that
.Nm man
will search.
The
.Nm man
configuration file (see
.Xr man_conf 5 )
specifies the possible
.Ar section
values that are currently available.
If only a single argument is specified or if the first argument is
not a valid section,
.Nm man
assumes that the argument is the name of a manual page to be displayed.
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width MANPATHX
.It Ev MACHINE
As some manual pages are intended only for use on certain architectures,
.Nm man
searches certain directories applicable to the current machine.
Man's
determination of the current machine type may be overridden by setting
the environment variable
.Ev MACHINE
to the name of an architecture (see
.Xr machine 1 ) .
Machine specific areas are checked before general areas.
.It Ev MANPATH
The standard search path used by
.Nm man
may be overridden by specifying a path in the
.Ev MANPATH
environment
variable.
The format of the path is a colon (``:'') separated list of directories.
The subdirectories to be searched as well as their search order
is specified by the ``_subdir'' line in the
.Nm man
configuration file.
.It Ev PAGER
Any value of the environment variable
.Ev PAGER
will be used instead of the standard pagination program
.Xr more 1 .
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /etc/man.conf -compact
.It Pa /etc/man.conf
man configuration file (see
.Xr man_conf 5 )
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr apropos 1 ,
.Xr machine 1 ,
.Xr whatis 1 ,
.Xr whereis 1 ,
.Xr man_conf 5
.Sh BUGS
The on-line manual pages are, by necessity, forgiving toward stupid
display devices, causing some manual pages to not be as good as their
typeset counterparts.
.Sh HISTORY
A
.Nm
command appeared in
.At v6 .
