.\" Copyright (c) 1980, 1990 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)lisp.1	6.4 (Berkeley) 5/6/91
.\"
.Dd May 6, 1991
.Dt LISP 1
.Os BSD 4
.Sh NAME
.Nm lisp
.Nd lisp interpreter
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm lisp
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm Lisp
is a lisp interpreter for a dialect which
closely resembles 
.Tn MIT Ns 's
.Tn MACLISP .
This lisp, known as
.Tn FRANZ LISP ,
features
an
.Tn I/O
facility which allows the user to change the input
and output syntax, add
macro characters, and maintain compatibility with upper-case
only lisp systems;
infinite precision integer arithmetic, and
an error facility which allows the user to trap system errors in
many different ways.
Interpreted functions may be mixed with code compiled by
.Xr liszt  1
and both may be debugged using the
``Joseph Lister'' trace package.
A
.Nm lisp
containing compiled and interpreted code may be dumped into
a file for later use.
.Pp
There are too many functions to list here; one should refer to the
manuals listed below.
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Nm Lisp
checks these
environment variables;
.Ev PATH ,
.Ev SHELL
and
.Ev TERM .
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /usr/lib/lisp/toplevel.l -compact
.It Pa /usr/lib/lisp/trace.l
Joseph Lister trace package.
.It Pa /usr/lib/lisp/toplevel.l
Top level read-eval-print loop.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr liszt 1 ,
.Xr lxref 1
.Rs
.%T "\\*(tNFRANZ LISP\\*(sP Manual"
.%N Version 1
.%A John K. Foderaro
.Re
.Rs
.%T "\\*(tNMACLISP\\*(sP Manual"
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
.Nm Lisp
appeared in
.Bx 3.0 .
.Sh BUGS
The error system is in a state of flux and not all error messages are
as informative as they could be.
