.so tmac.ilib
.TH DELAMC 1 "The University of Arizona \- 8/15/84"
.SH NAME
delamc \- delaminate a file using separator characters
.SH SYNOPSIS
\f3delamc\fP [\-tchars] {infile | \-} {outputfile | \-}...
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fIDelamc\fR delaminates an input file into several output files
according to the separator characters specified by the \f3chars\fR
argument following the \f3\-t\fR flag.
\fIDelamc\fR reads \f3infile\fR and writes the fields in each line to the
corresponding output files as individual lines. If no data occurs in
the specified position for a given input line an empty output line is
written. This insures that all output files contain the same number of
lines as the input file.
.PP
If `\-' is used for \f3infile\fR, the standard input is read.
If `\-' is used as an output file name, the corresponding field
is written to the standard output. If the \f3\-t\fR flag is not used,
an ascii horizontal tab character is assumed as the default
field separator.
.PP
The use of \fIdelamc\fR is illustrated by the following examples.
.DS
delamc tst.asm labels opcodes operands
.DE
reads the file \fItst.asm\fR and writes the fields, each of which is
separated by a tab character, to the output files \fIlabels\fR, \fIopcodes\fR,
and \fIoperands\fR.
.DS
delamc \-t: scores names matric ps1 ps2 ps3
.DE
reads the file \fIscores\fR and writes the fields, each of which is
separated by a colon, to the indicated output files.
.DS
delamc \-t,:; oldata f1 f2
.DE
reads the file \fIoldata\fR and separates the fields using either a comma,
a colon, or a semicolon.
.SH NOTES
The functionality of the Software Tools \fIdelam\fR has
been divided. \fIDelamc\fR differs from the Tools
syntax by allowing a set of separation characters to be specified.
.SH SEE ALSO
lam(1),
delam(1)
.LP
.St
.SH AUTHOR
Thomas R. Hicks
