.\" Copyright (c) 1983 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms are permitted
.\" provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
.\" duplicated in all such forms and that any documentation,
.\" advertising materials, and other materials related to such
.\" distribution and use acknowledge that the software was developed
.\" by the University of California, Berkeley.  The name of the
.\" University may not be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\" from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'' AND WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.\"
.\"	@(#)byteorder.3	6.3 (Berkeley) 2/14/89
.\"
.TH BYTEORDER 3 "February 14, 1989"
.UC 5
.SH NAME
htonl, htons, ntohl, ntohs \- convert values between host and network byte order
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <sys/types.h>
.B #include <netinet/in.h>
.PP
.B netlong = htonl(hostlong);
.B u_long netlong, hostlong;
.PP
.B netshort = htons(hostshort);
.B u_short netshort, hostshort;
.PP
.B hostlong = ntohl(netlong);
.B u_long hostlong, netlong;
.PP
.B hostshort = ntohs(netshort);
.B u_short hostshort, netshort;
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
These routines convert 16 and 32 bit quantities between network
byte order and host byte order.  On machines such as the SUN
these routines are defined as null macros in the include file
.RI < netinet/in.h >.
.PP
These routines are most often used in conjunction with Internet
addresses and ports as returned by
.IR gethostbyname (3)
and
.IR getservent (3).
.SH "SEE ALSO"
gethostbyname(3), getservent(3)
.SH BUGS
The VAX handles bytes backwards from most everyone else in
the world.  This is not expected to be fixed in the near future.
