.\" Copyright (c) 1986 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms are permitted
.\" provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
.\" duplicated in all such forms and that any documentation,
.\" advertising materials, and other materials related to such
.\" distribution and use acknowledge that the software was developed
.\" by the University of California, Berkeley.  The name of the
.\" University may not be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\" from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'' AND WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.\"
.\"	@(#)ns.3	6.3 (Berkeley) 2/14/89
.\"
.TH NS 3 "February 14, 1989"
.UC 6
.SH NAME
ns_addr, ns_ntoa \- Xerox NS(tm)  address conversion routines
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B "#include <sys/types.h>
.B "#include <netns/ns.h>
.PP
.B "struct ns_addr ns_addr(cp)
.B "char *cp;
.PP
.B "char *ns_ntoa(ns)
.B "struct ns_addr ns;
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The routine
.I ns_addr
interprets character strings representing
XNS addresses, returning binary information suitable
for use in system calls.
.I ns_ntoa
takes XNS addresses and returns ASCII
strings representing the address in a
notation in common use in the Xerox Development Environment:
.nf
	<network number>.<host number>.<port number>
.fi
Trailing zero fields are suppressed, and each number is printed in hexadecimal,
in a format suitable for input to 
.IR ns_addr .
Any fields lacking super-decimal digits will have a
trailing ``H'' appended.
.PP
Unfortunately, no universal standard exists for representing XNS addresses.
An effort has been made to insure that
.I ns_addr
be compatible with most formats in common use.
It will first separate an address into 1 to 3 fields using a single delimiter
chosen from
period (``.''),
colon (``:'') or pound-sign (``#'').
Each field is then examined for byte separators (colon or period).
If there are byte separators, each subfield separated is taken to be
a small hexadecimal number, and the entirety is taken as a network-byte-ordered
quantity to be zero extended in the high-network-order bytes.
Next, the field is inspected for hyphens, in which case
the field is assumed to be a number in decimal notation
with hyphens separating the millenia.
Next, the field is assumed to be a number:
It is interpreted
as hexadecimal if there is a leading ``0x'' (as in C),
a trailing ``H'' (as in Mesa), or there are any super-decimal digits present.
It is interpreted as octal is there is a leading ``0''
and there are no super-octal digits.
Otherwise, it is converted as a decimal number.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
hosts(5), networks(5),
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
None (see BUGS).
.SH BUGS
The string returned by
.I ns_ntoa
resides in a static memory area.
.br
.I ns_addr
should diagnose improperly formed input, and there should be an unambiguous
way to recognize this.
