.TH INEWS 1 "28 July 1983"
.UC 4
.SH NAME
inews \- submit news articles
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B inews
[
.B \-h
]
.B \-t
.IR title " [ "
.B \-n 
.IR newsgroups " ] [ "
.B \-e 
.IR "expiration date" " ]"
.PP
.B "inews \-p"
.RI " [ " filename " ] "
.PP
.BI "inews \-C " newsgroup
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Inews
submits news articles to the USENET news
network.
It is intended as a raw interface, not as a human user interface.
Casual users should probably use
.IR postnews (1)
instead.
.PP
The first form is for submitting user articles.
The body will be read from the standard
input.  A
.I title
must be specified as there is no default.  Each article
belongs to a list of newsgroups.  If the
.B \-n
flag is omitted, the list
will default to something line 
.IR general .
(On ours, it is 
.IR general .)
If you wish to submit
an article in multiple newsgroups, the
.I newsgroups
must be separated by commas and/or spaces.
If not specified, the expiration date will be
set to the local default.
The
.B \-f
flag specifies the article's sender.  Without this flag, the sender
defaults to the user's name.
If
.B \-f
is specified, the real sender's name will be included as a Sender line.
The
.B \-h
flag specifies that headers are present at the beginning of the
article, and these headers should be included with the article
header instead of as text.
(This mechanism can be used to edit headers and supply additional
nondefault headers, but not to specify certain information,
such as the sender and article ID, that inews itself generates.)
.LP
When posting an article, the environment is checked for
information about the sender.
If NAME is found, its value is used for the full name,
rather than the system value (often in /etc/passwd).
This is useful if the system value cannot be set, or when
more than one person uses the same login.
If ORGANIZATION is found, the value overrides the system
default organization.
This is useful when a person uses a guest login and is
not primarily associated with the organization owning the machine.
.LP
The second form is used for receiving articles from other machines.
If
.I filename
is given, the article will be read from the specified file; otherwise
the article will be read from the standard input.  An expiration date
need not be present and a receival date, if present, will be ignored.
.LP
After local installation, inews will transmit the article to all systems
that subscribe to the newsgroups that the article belongs to.
.LP
The third form is for creating new newsgroups.  On some systems, this may
be limited to specific users such as the super-user or news administrator.
(This happens on ours.)
.LP
If the file /usr/lib/news/recording is present, it is taken as a list of
"recordings" to be shown to users posting news.
(This is by analogy to the recording you hear when you dial information
in some parts of the country, asking you if you really wanted to do this.)
The file contains lines of the form:
.br
	newsgroups <tab> filename
.br
for example:
.br
	net.all	net.recording
	fa.all	fa.recording
.br
Any user posting an article to a newsgroup matching the pattern on
the left will be shown the contents of the file on the right.
The file is found in the LIB directory (often /usr/lib/news).
The user is then told to hit DEL to abort or RETURN to proceed.
The intent of this feature is to help companies keep proprietary
information from accidently leaking out.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 40
/usr/spool/news/.sys.nnn
Temporary articles
.TP 40
.RI /usr/spool/news/ newsgroups / article_no.
Articles
.TP 40
/usr/spool/oldnews/
Expired articles
.TP 40
/usr/lib/news/active
List of known newsgroups and highest local article numbers in each.
.TP 40
/usr/lib/news/seq
Sequence number of last article
.TP 40
/usr/lib/news/history
List of all articles ever seen
.TP 40
/usr/lib/news/sys
System subscription list
.PD
.SH "SEE ALSO"
Mail(1),
binmail(1),
getdate(3),
msgs(1),
news(5),
newsrc(5),
postnews(1),
readnews(1),
recnews(1),
sendnews(8),
uucp(1),
uurec(8),
.SH AUTHORS
Matt Glickman
.br
Mark Horton
.br
Stephen Daniel
.br
Tom R. Truscott
