.\" (c) Copyright 1986 Xerox Corporation
.\" All rights reserved.
.TH IPTROFF 1 5/23/85
.CM 2
.SH "NAME"
iptroff \- convert troff to Interpress
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.B iptroff
[
\fB\-D\fR\0 device
] [
\fB\-o\fR\0 output-file
] [
.B \-t
] troff\ arguments
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.I Iptroff
runs
.IR troff (1)
sending its output through
.IR dipress (1)
to produce typeset output for an Interpress printer.
As the document is processed, the names of the passes will
be printed.  This can be suppressed with the
.B \-q
(quiet) switch.
If the troff
.B \-t
switch is specified, however,
the troff output will be sent directly to the standard output
and not piped through
.IR dipress .
In addition, the
.B \-q
option is assumed with the
.B \-t
option.
If the
.B \-D
switch is specified, then the font metrics for the named device
will be used instead of the default set.  The actual printer
that the Interpress master gets sent to is site dependent.
If the
.B \-o
option is specified, then the Interpress master is left in the
specified file rather than being transmitted to a print server.
.PP
The default font is TroffClassic which is the normal Xerox Classic
font augmented to provide all the special characters found
in the troff manual with the single exception of the Bell System Logo.
.PP
Example:
.sp
.RS
iptroff\0\-ms\0paper
.RE
.sp
will set a paper with the ``ms'' macro package
in the TroffClassic.
.SH "FILES"
.ta \w'$LIB/fonts/*  'u
$LIB/fonts/*	default font mounts and bug fixes
.DT
.SH "SEE ALSO"
The Interpress Toolkit manual,
dipress(1),
troff(1)
