.TH PSTAT 1M
.UC
.SH NAME
pstat \- print system facts
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pstat
[
.B \-aixptuf
] [ suboptions ]
[ file ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Pstat
interprets the contents of certain system tables.
If
.I file
is given, the tables are sought there, otherwise
in
.I /dev/kmem.
The required namelist is taken from
.I /vmunix.
Options are
.TP \w'WCHAN\ 'u
.B \-a
Under
.BR \-p ,
describe all process slots rather than just active ones.
.TP
.B \-i
Print the inode table with the these headings:
.IP LOC
The core location of this table entry.
.PD 0
.IP FLAGS
Miscellaneous state variables encoded thus:
.RS
.IP L
locked
.IP U
update time
.IR filsys (5))
must be corrected
.IP A
access time must be corrected
.IP M
file system is mounted here
.IP W
wanted by another process (L flag is on)
.IP T
contains a text file
.IP C
changed time must be corrected
.RE
.IP CNT
Number of open file table entries for this inode.
.IP DEV
Major and minor device number of file system in which
this inode resides.
.IP INO
I-number within the device.
.IP MODE
Mode bits, see
.IR chmod (2).
.IP NLK
Number of links to this inode.
.IP UID
User ID of owner.
.IP SIZ/DEV
Number of bytes in an ordinary file, or
major and minor device of special file.
.PD
.TP
.B \-x
Print the text table with these headings:
.IP LOC
The core location of this table entry.
.PD 0
.IP FLAGS
Miscellaneous state variables encoded thus:
.RS
.IP T
.IR ptrace (2)
in effect
.IP W
text not yet written on swap device
.IP L
loading in progress
.IP K
locked
.IP w
wanted (L flag is on)
.IP P
resulted from demand-page-from-inode exec format (see
.IR exec (2))
.RE
.PD
.IP DADDR
Disk address in swap, measured in multiples of 512 bytes.
.IP CADDR
Head of a linked list of loaded processes using this text segment.
.IP SIZE
Size of text segment, measured in multiples of 512 bytes.
.IP IPTR
Core location of corresponding inode.
.IP CNT
Number of processes using this text segment.
.IP CCNT
Number of processes in core using this text segment.
.PD
.TP
.B \-p
Print process table for active processes with these headings:
.IP LOC
The core location of this table entry.
.PD 0
.IP S
Run state encoded thus:
.RS
.IP 0
no process
.IP 1
waiting for some event
.IP 3
runnable
.IP 4
being created
.IP 5
being terminated
.IP 6
stopped under trace
.RE
.IP F
Miscellaneous state variables, or-ed together (hexadecimal):
.RS
.IP 0001
loaded
.IP 0002
the scheduler process
.IP 0004
locked for swap out
.IP 0008
swapped out
.IP 0010
traced
.IP 0020
used in tracing
.IP 0040
locked in by
.IR lock (2).
.IP 0080
in page-wait
.IP 0100
prevented from swapping during
.IR fork (2)
.IP 0200
gathering pages for raw i/o
.IP 0400
exiting
.IP 1000
process resulted from a
.IR vfork (2)
which is not yet complete
.IP 2000
another flag for
.IR vfork (2)
.IP 4000
process has no virtual memory, as it is a parent in the context of
.IR vfork (2)
.IP 8000
process is demand paging data pages from its text inode.
.RE
.IP POIP
number of pages currently being pushed out from this process.
.IP PRI
Scheduling priority, see
.IR nice (2).
.IP SIGNAL
Signals received (signals 1-16 coded in bits 0-15),
.IP UID
Real user ID.
.IP SLP
Amount of time process has been blocked.
.IP TIM
Time resident in seconds; times over 127 coded as 127.
.IP CPU
Weighted integral of CPU time, for scheduler.
.IP NI
Nice level,
see
.IR nice (2).
.IP PGRP
Process number of root of process group
(the opener of the controlling terminal).
.IP PID
The process ID number.
.IP PPID
The process ID of parent process.
.IP ADDR
If in core, the page frame number of the first page of the `u-area' of
the process.
If swapped out, the position in the swap area
measured in multiples of 512 bytes.
.IP RSS
Resident set size \- the number of physical page frames allocated
to this process.
.IP SRSS
RSS at last swap (0 if never swapped).
.IP SIZE
Virtual size of process image (data+stack) in multiples of 512 bytes.
.IP WCHAN
Wait channel number of a waiting process.
.IP LINK
Link pointer in list of runnable processes.
.IP TEXTP
If text is pure, pointer to location of text table entry.
.IP CLKT
Countdown for
.IR alarm (2)
measured in seconds.
.PD
.TP
.B \-t
Print table for terminals
with these headings:
.IP RAW
Number of characters in raw input queue.
.PD 0
.IP CAN
Number of characters in canonicalized input queue.
.IP OUT
Number of characters in putput queue.
.IP MODE
See
.IR tty (4).
.IP ADDR
Physical device address.
.IP DEL
Number of delimiters (newlines) in canonicalized input queue.
.IP COL
Calculated column position of terminal.
.IP STATE
Miscellaneous state variables encoded thus:
.RS
.IP W
waiting for open to complete
.IP O
open
.IP S
has special (output) start routine
.IP C
carrier is on
.IP B
busy doing output
.IP A
process is awaiting output
.IP X
open for exclusive use
.IP H
hangup on close
.RE
.IP PGRP
Process group for which this is controlling terminal.
.PD
.TP
.B \-u
print information about a user process;
the next argument is its address as given
by
.IR ps (1).
The process must be in main memory, or the file used can
be a core image and the address 0.
.TP
.B \-f
Print the open file table with these headings:
.IP LOC
The core location of this table entry.
.PD 0
.IP FLG
Miscellaneous state variables encoded thus:
.RS
.IP R
open for reading
.IP W
open for writing
.IP P
pipe
.RE
.IP CNT
Number of processes that know this open file.
.IP INO
The location of the inode table entry for this file.
.IP OFFS
The file offset, see
.IR lseek (2).
.PD
.PP
.SH FILES
.ta \w'/dev/kmem  'u
/vmunix	namelist
.br
/dev/kmem	default source of tables
.SH SEE ALSO
ps(1), stat(2), filsys(5)
.br
K. Thompson,
.I UNIX Implementation
.br
O. Babaoglu and W. Joy
.I "Data Structures added in the Berkeley Virtual Memory Extensions to the UNIX System"
