.TH CUT 1L \" -*- nroff -*-
.SH NAME
cut \- remove sections from each line of files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cut
{\-b byte-list, \-\-bytes=byte-list} [\-n] [file...]

.B cut
{\-c character-list, \-\-characters=character-list} [file...]

.B cut
{\-f field-list, \-\-fields=field-list} [\-d delim] [\-s]
[\-\-delimiter=delim] [\-\-only-delimited] [file...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page
documents the GNU version of
.BR cut .
.B cut
prints sections of each line of each input file, or the standard
input if no files are given.  A file name of `-' means standard input.
Which sections are printed is selected by the options.
.SS OPTIONS
The
.IR byte-list ,
.IR character-list ,
and
.I field-list
are one or more numbers or ranges (two numbers separated by a dash)
separated by commas.  The first byte, character, and field are
numbered 1.  Incomplete ranges may be given: `\-m' means
`1\-m'; `n\-' means `n' through end of line or last field.
.TP
.I "\-b, \-\-bytes byte-list"
Print only the bytes in positions listed in
.IR byte-list .
Tabs and backspaces are treated like any other character; they take up
1 byte.
.TP
.I "\-c, \-\-characters character-list"
Print only characters in positions listed in
.IR character-list .
The same as \-b for now, but internationalization will change that.
Tabs and backspaces are treated like any other character; they take up
1 character.
.TP
.I "\-f, \-\-fields field-list"
Print only the fields listed in
.IR field-list .
Fields are separated by a TAB by default.
.TP
.I "\-d, \-\-delimiter delim"
For \-f, fields are separated by the first character in
.I delim
instead of by TAB.
.TP
.I \-n
Do not split multibyte characters (no-op for now).
.TP
.I "\-s, \-\-only-delimited"
For \-f, do not print lines that do not contain the field separator
character.
.PP
The long-named options can be introduced with `+' as well as `\-\-',
for compatibility with previous releases.  Eventually support for `+'
will be removed, because it is incompatible with the POSIX.2 standard.
