.\" Copyright (c) 1980 Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.  The Berkeley software License Agreement
.\" specifies the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.\"
.\"	@(#)netlogin.1	6.1 (Berkeley) 4/29/85
.\"
.TH NETLOGIN 1 "4/29/85"
.UC 4
.ds s 1
.ds o 1
.SH NAME
netlogin \- provide login name and password for a remote machine
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B netlogin
.B \-m
machine [
.B \-l
login
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I netlogin
command sets the login name and password for the specified
.I machine
in a rather unusual way.
The user should type (to the C shell)
.IP
setenv\ MACH\fImachine\fR\ \(ganetlogin\ \-m\ \fImachine\fR\(ga
.LP
or (to the default Version 7 ``Bourne'' shell)
.IP
MACH\fImachine\fR=\(ganetlogin\ \-m\ \fImachine\fR\(ga; export MACH\fImachine\fR
.PP
to his login shell.  (Note the back-quotes).
For example,
.IP
setenv\ MACHA\ `netlogin\ \-m\ A`
.PP
will prompt the user for his login name and password on the A machine and
.IP
setenv\ MACHA\ `netlogin\ \-m\ A \-l\ myname`
.PP
will prompt the user for the password to account `A:myname'.
.PP
The 
.IR net (\*s)
command will read the environment looking for environment variables
beginning with ``MACH'' and followed by a valid machine name on the
local network.
If found it will use that information rather than prompt the user
every time he executes a network command.
This environment information is ignored if login names and passwords
are specified on the command line of network commands using the 
.B \-l
and 
.B \-p
options or in the
.I \&.netrc
file.
.PP
This procedure for specifying passwords is somewhat safer than
putting the remote passwords in the
.I \&.netrc
file.
The passwords in the environment are encrypted and the environment
information is useless after the user logs out.
Use the 
.IR printenv (\*o)
command to see the encrypted password.
.SH AUTHOR
Eric Schmidt
.SH "SEE ALSO"
net(\*s), netrm(\*s), netq(\*s), netlog(\*s), netcp(\*s),
netlpr(\*s), netmail(\*s), printenv(\*o), csh(\*o)
.SH BUGS
