.\" Copyright (c) 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" %sccs.include.redist.man%
.\"
.\"	@(#)MAKEDEV.8	8.1 (Berkeley) %G%
.\"
.TH MAKEDEV 8 ""
.UC 7
.SH NAME
MAKEDEV \- create system and device special files
.SH SYNOPSIS
MAKEDEV name ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
The shell script
.IR MAKEDEV ,
found in the ``/dev'' directory, is used to create the common special
files.
See
.IR special (8)
for a more complete discussion of special files.
.PP
.I MAKEDEV
takes any number of device names as arguments, where the names are
the common abbreviation for the device.
There are two special devices, ``std'' and ``local''.
The former creates the standard devices for the architecture.
The latter is for devices specific to the local site, and
executes the shell file ``MAKEDEV.local''.
.PP
The i386 supports the following devices.
Where a device name is followed by a hash sign (``#''), the hash sign
must be replaced by a unit number.
.TP 10
std
the standard devices (console, drum, fd/*, klog, kmem, mem, null,
stderr, stdin, stdout, tty)
.br
.ns
.TP 10
local
configuration specific devices
.br
.ns
.TP 10
com#
standard PC COM ports
.br
.ns
.TP 10
fd#
``floppy'' disk drives (3 1/2, 5 1/4)
.br
.ns
.TP 10
flog#
kernel logging device
.br
.ns
.TP 10
pty#
set of 16 master and slave pseudo terminals
.br
.ns
.TP 10
wd#
``winchester'' disk drives (ST506, IDE, ESDI, RLL etc.)
.br
.ns
.TP 10
wt#
QIC-interfaced (e.g. not SCSI) 3M cartridge tape
.SH FILES
/dev		The special file directory.
.SH SEE ALSO
.IR mknod (1), 
.IR intro (4),
.IR config (8),
.IR special (8)
