.\" Copyright (c) 1990 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to Berkeley by
.\" the Systems Programming Group of the University of Utah Computer
.\" Science Department.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms are permitted provided
.\" that: (1) source distributions retain this entire copyright notice and
.\" comment, and (2) distributions including binaries display the following
.\" acknowledgement:  ``This product includes software developed by the
.\" University of California, Berkeley and its contributors'' in the
.\" documentation or other materials provided with the distribution and in
.\" all advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software.
.\" Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors may
.\" be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\" specific prior written permission.
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'' AND WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.\"
.\"	@(#)cons.4	5.1 (Berkeley) 6/29/90
.\"
.TH CONS 4 "June 29, 1990"
.UC 7
.SH NAME
cons \- HP300 console interface
.SH DESCRIPTION
This release supports a ``virtual'' console device used for kernel
.I printf
messages and accessed in user mode via /dev/console.
It is virtual in the sense that it is attached to a hardware interface
at boot time.
Currently the choices are limited to:
a bit-mapped display acting as an
.I "internal terminal emulator"
(ITE),
the builtin serial interface (dca),
or a ``null'' console in that order.
.SH FILES
/dev/console
.SH "SEE ALSO"
tty(4), reboot(8)
.SH BUGS
You should be able to specify potential console devices at
.I config
time.
