.\" Copyright (c) 1990 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to Berkeley by
.\" the Systems Programming Group of the University of Utah Computer
.\" Science Department.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms are permitted provided
.\" that: (1) source distributions retain this entire copyright notice and
.\" comment, and (2) distributions including binaries display the following
.\" acknowledgement:  ``This product includes software developed by the
.\" University of California, Berkeley and its contributors'' in the
.\" documentation or other materials provided with the distribution and in
.\" all advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software.
.\" Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors may
.\" be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\" specific prior written permission.
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'' AND WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.\"
.\"	@(#)dca.4	5.1 (Berkeley) 6/29/90
.\"
.TH DCA 4 "June 29, 1990"
.UC 7
.SH NAME
dca \- HP 98644A communications interface
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B "device		dca0	at scode9 flags 0x1"
.SH DESCRIPTION
The 98644A is a single port EIA RS-232C (CCITT V.28)
communications interface with a single character buffer.
Such an interface is built-in to all series 300 machines.
.PP
Each 98644A line behaves as described in
.IR tty (4).
Input and output for each line may set to one of following baud rates;
50, 75, 110, 134.5, 150, 300, 600, 1200, 1800, 2400, 4800,
9600, 19200. See 
.IR tty (4)
for the encoding.
.PP
Flags should be set to 1 if the line should be treated as hard-wired
with carrier always present or 0 if modem control is desired.
.SH FILES
/dev/tty0
.SH "SEE ALSO"
tty(4)
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
\fBdca%d: silo overflow\fR.  The single-character input ``silo''
has overflowed and incoming data has been lost.
.SH BUGS
Data loss is possible on busy systems with baud rates greater than 300.
The
.I dca
has never been tested with modem control enabled or on anything but the
built-in interface.
