.\" Copyright (c) 1990 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to Berkeley by
.\" the Systems Programming Group of the University of Utah Computer
.\" Science Department.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms are permitted provided
.\" that: (1) source distributions retain this entire copyright notice and
.\" comment, and (2) distributions including binaries display the following
.\" acknowledgement:  ``This product includes software developed by the
.\" University of California, Berkeley and its contributors'' in the
.\" documentation or other materials provided with the distribution and in
.\" all advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software.
.\" Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors may
.\" be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\" specific prior written permission.
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'' AND WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.\"
.\"	@(#)rmp.4	5.1 (Berkeley) 6/29/90
.\"
.TH RMP 4F "June 29, 1990"
.UC 7
.SH NAME
rmp \- HP Remote Maintenance Protocol family
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B options RMP
.PP
.B #include <sys/types.h>
.br
.B #include <sys/socket.h>
.br
.B #include <netrmp/rmp.h>
.br
.B #include <netrmp/rmp_var.h>
.PP
.B s = socket(AF_RMP, SOCK_RAW, proto);
.SH DESCRIPTION
Hewlett-Packard's Remote Maintenance Protocol family is a collection
of protocols layered atop
.I IEEE 802.3.
The current implementation of the RMP family provides protocol support only
for the SOCK_RAW socket type.
As a result, sendto(2) and recvfrom(2) must be used to send and
receive RMP packets.
.PP
The format of an RMP packet is defined in the include file
.RI < netrmp/rmp_var.h >.
The RMP packet arrives encapsulated in an (HP extended)
.I IEEE 802.2
packet.
The
.I IEEE 802.2
packet
is preceded by the kernel address of an
.I ifnet struct
which is used to `route' a packet out the same interface it
arrived on.
Outgoing packets are encapsulated in a standard
.I IEEE 802.3
packet, while incoming packets have this information stripped away.
.SH ADDRESSING
RMP (IEEE 802.3) addresses are 6 octets in length (48 bytes).
Sockets in the Remote Maintenance Protocol family use the following
addressing structure:
.nf

struct sockaddr_rmp {
	short		srmp_family;
	u_char		srmp_dhost[6];
};

.fi
.SH PROTOCOLS
The RMP protocol family supported by the operating system
is currently comprised of the Boot Protocol
.I (proto=RMPPROTO_BOOT).
Unfortunately, we have no documentation on the Remote Maintenance
Protocol and only sketchy information about the Boot Protocol.
.SH SEE ALSO
socket(2), bind(2), sendto(2), recvfrom(2), intro(4N), rbootd(8)
.br
An Advanced 4.3BSD Interprocess Communication Tutorial
.SH BUGS
.TP 2
\-
The HP ROM uses IEEE 802.3 (as opposed to Ethernet) packets.  While the
kernel heuristically recognizes these packets, a more general mechanism
for doing so should be provided.
.TP 2
\-
The HP ROM uses a multicast address when first trying to locate boot
servers.  While the Ethernet [sic] board is programmed to recognize
this particular multicast address (9:0:9:0:0:4), a more general
mechanism for doing so should be provided.
.TP 2
\-
The kernel supports only RAW sockets for the RMP protocol.
This is either a bug or a feature, since the kernel is smaller at the
price of greater complexity in the server.
.TP 2
\-
There is no support for bind(2)'ing an address in the RMP domain.
Something like an RMPADDR_ANY should be provided to prevent more than one
.I rbootd
server from running at the same time.
