.TH RCSDIFF 1L "" "Purdue University"
.SH NAME
rcsdiff \- compare RCS revisions
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBrcsdiff\fR [ \fB\-biwt\fR ] [ \fB\-cefhn\fR ] [ \fB\-q\fR ] [ \fB\-r\fIrev1\fR ] [ \fB\-r\fIrev2\fR ] file ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Rcsdiff
runs
.IR diff (1)
to compare two revisions of each RCS file given.
A file name ending in ',v' is an RCS file name, otherwise a
working file name. \fIRcsdiff\fR derives the working file name from the RCS
file name and vice versa, as explained in
.IR co (1L).
Pairs consisting
of both an RCS and a working file name may also be specified.
.PP
The options \fB\-b\fR, \fB\-i\fR, \fB\-w\fR, \fB\-t\fR,
\fB\-c\fR, \fB\-e\fR, \fB\-f\fR, and \fB\-h\fR,
have the same effect as described in
.IR diff (1);
option
\fB\-n\fR generates an edit script of the format used by RCS.
The option \fB\-q\fR suppresses diagnostic output.
.PP
If both \fIrev1\fR and \fIrev2\fR
are omitted, \fIrcsdiff\fR compares the latest revision on the
default branch (normally the highest branch on the trunk)
with the contents of the corresponding working file. This is useful
for determining what you changed since the last checkin.
.PP
If \fIrev1\fR is given, but \fIrev2\fR is omitted,
\fIrcsdiff\fR compares revision \fIrev1\fR of the RCS file with
the contents of the corresponding working file.
.PP
If both \fIrev1\fR and \fIrev2\fR are given,
\fIrcsdiff\fR compares revisions \fIrev1\fR and \fIrev2\fR of the RCS file.
.PP
Both \fIrev1\fR and \fIrev2\fR may be given numerically or symbolically,
and may actually be attached to any of the options.
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
The command

.B "        rcsdiff  f.c

.fi
runs \fIdiff\fR on the latest revision on the default branch of RCS file f.c,v
and the contents of working file f.c.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
The exit status is 0 if there were no differences during the last comparison,
1 if there were differences, and 2 if there were errors.
.SH IDENTIFICATION
.de VL
\\$2
..
Author: Walter F. Tichy,
Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, 47907.
.sp 0
Revision Number:
.VL $Revision: 1.4 $
; Release Date:
.VL $Date: 89/08/15 21:16:07 $
\&.
.sp 0
Copyright \(co 1982, 1988, 1989 by Walter F. Tichy.
.SH SEE ALSO
ci(1L), co(1L), diff(1), ident(1L), rcs(1L), rcsintro(1L), rcsmerge(1L), rlog(1L)
.br
Walter F. Tichy, "Design, Implementation, and Evaluation of a Revision Control
System," in \fIProceedings of the 6th International Conference on Software
Engineering\fR, IEEE, Tokyo, Sept. 1982.
