.\" Copyright (c) 1980 Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.  The Berkeley software License Agreement
.\" specifies the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.\"
.\"	@(#)config.8	6.2 (Berkeley) 5/20/86
.\"
.TH CONFIG 8 "May 20, 1986"
.UC 4
.SH NAME
config \- build system configuration files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B /etc/config
[
.B \-p
]
.I SYSTEM_NAME
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.I Config
builds a set of system configuration files from a short file which describes
the sort of system that is being configured.  It also takes as input a file
which tells
.I config
what files are needed to generate a system.
This can be augmented by a configuration specific set of files
that give alternate files for a specific machine.
(see the FILES section below)
If the
.B \-p
option is supplied, 
.I config
will configure a system for profiling; c.f.
.IR kgmon (8)
and
.IR gprof (1).
.PP
.I Config
should be run from the
.B conf
subdirectory of the system source (usually /sys/conf).
Its argument is the name of a system configuration file
containing device specifications, configuration options
and other system parameters for one system configuration.
.I Config
assumes that there is already a directory
.I "../SYSTEM_NAME"
created and it places all its output files in there.  
The output of
.I config
consists of a number of files; for the VAX, they are:
.B ioconf.c
contains a description
of what I/O devices are attached to the system,;
.B ubglue.s
contains a set of interrupt service routines for devices
attached to the UNIBUS;
.B ubvec.s
contains offsets into a structure used for counting per-device interrupts;
.B Makefile
is a file used by
.IR make (1)
in building the system; a set of header files contain definitions of
the number of various devices that will be compiled into the system;
and a set of swap configuration files contain definitions for
the disk areas to be used for swapping, the root file system,
argument processing, and system dumps.
.PP
After running
.IR config ,
it is necessary to run ``make depend'' in the directory where the new makefile
was created.
.I Config
prints a reminder of this when it completes.
.PP
If any other error messages are produced by
.I config,
the problems in the configuration file should be corrected and
.I config
should be run again.
Attempts to compile a system that had configuration errors
are likely to meet with failure.
.SH FILES
.nf
/sys/conf/Makefile.vax	generic makefile for the VAX
/sys/conf/files	list of common files system is built from
/sys/conf/files.vax	list of VAX specific files
/sys/conf/devices.vax	name to major device mapping file for the VAX
/sys/conf/files.ERNIE	list of files specific to ERNIE system
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
``Building 4.3BSD UNIX System with Config''
.br
The SYNOPSIS portion of each device in section 4.
.SH BUGS
The line numbers reported in error messages are usually off by one.
