.\" Copyright (c) 1983 Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.  The Berkeley software License Agreement
.\" specifies the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.\"
.\"	@(#)printcap.5	6.1 (Berkeley) %G%
.\"
.TH PRINTCAP 5 ""
.UC 5
.ad
.SH NAME
printcap \- printer capability data base
.SH SYNOPSIS
/etc/printcap
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Printcap
is a simplified version of the
.IR termcap (5)
data base
used to describe line printers.  The spooling system accesses the
.I printcap
file every time it is used, allowing dynamic
addition and deletion of printers.  Each entry in the data base
is used to describe one printer.  This data base may not be
substituted for, as is possible for 
.IR termcap ,
because it may allow accounting to be bypassed.
.PP
The default printer is normally 
.IR lp ,
though the environment variable PRINTER
may be used to override this.  Each spooling utility supports an option,
.BI \-P printer,
to allow explicit naming of a destination printer.
.PP
Refer to the
.ul
4.2BSD Line Printer Spooler Manual
for a complete discussion on how setup the database for a given printer.
.SH CAPABILITIES
Refer to
.I termcap
for a description of the file layout.
.nf

.ta \w'k0-k9  'u +\w'Type  'u +\w'``/usr/spool/lpd\'\'  'u
\fBName	Type	Default	Description\fR
af	str	NULL	name of accounting file
br	num	none	if lp is a tty, set the baud rate (ioctl call)
cf	str	NULL	cifplot data filter
df	str	NULL	tex data filter (DVI format)
fc	num	0	if lp is a tty, clear flag bits (sgtty.h)
ff	str	``\ef''	string to send for a form feed
fo	bool	false	print a form feed when device is opened
fs	num	0	like `fc' but set bits
gf	str	NULL	graph data filter (plot (3X) format)
hl	bool	false	print the burst header page last
ic	bool	false	driver supports (non standard) ioctl to indent printout
if	str	NULL	name of text filter which does accounting
lf	str	``/dev/console''	error logging file name
lo	str	``lock''	name of lock file
lp	str	``/dev/lp''	device name to open for output
mx	num	1000	maximum file size (in BUFSIZ blocks), zero = unlimited
nd	str	NULL	next directory for list of queues (unimplemented)
nf	str	NULL	ditroff data filter (device independent troff)
of	str	NULL	name of output filtering program
pl	num	66	page length (in lines)
pw	num	132	page width (in characters)
px	num	0	page width in pixels (horizontal)
py	num	0	page length in pixels (vertical)
rf	str	NULL	filter for printing FORTRAN style text files
rg	str	NULL	restricted group. Only members of group allowed access
rm	str	NULL	machine name for remote printer
rp	str	``lp''	remote printer name argument
rs	bool	false	restrict remote users to those with local accounts
rw	bool	false	open the printer device for reading and writing
sb	bool	false	short banner (one line only)
sc	bool	false	suppress multiple copies
sd	str	``/usr/spool/lpd''	spool directory
sf	bool	false	suppress form feeds
sh	bool	false	suppress printing of burst page header
st	str	``status''	status file name
tf	str	NULL	troff data filter (cat phototypesetter)
tr	str	NULL	trailer string to print when queue empties
vf	str	NULL	raster image filter
xc	num	0	if lp is a tty, clear local mode bits (tty (4))
xs	num	0	like `xc' but set bits
.fi
.PP
Error messages sent to the console have a carriage return and a line
feed appended to them, rather than just a line feed.
.PP
If the local line printer driver supports indentation, the daemon
must understand how to invoke it.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
termcap(5),
lpc(8),
lpd(8),
pac(8),
lpr(1),
lpq(1),
lprm(1)
.br
.ul
4.2BSD Line Printer Spooler Manual
