.\" Copyright (c) 1991 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" %sccs.include.redist.man%
.\"
.\"	@(#)MAKEDEV.8	5.2 (Berkeley) %G%
.\"
.TH MAKEDEV 8 ""
.UC 7
.SH NAME
MAKEDEV \- create system and device special files
.SH SYNOPSIS
MAKEDEV name ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
The shell script
.IR MAKEDEV ,
found in the ``/dev'' directory, is used to create the common special
files.
See
.IR special (8)
for a more complete discussion of special files.
.PP
.I MAKEDEV
takes any number of device names as arguments, where the names are
the common abbreviation for the device.
There are two special devices, ``std'' and ``local''.
The former creates the standard devices for the architecture.
The latter is for devices specific to the local site, and
executes the shell file ``MAKEDEV.local''.
.PP
The HP300 supports the following devices.
Where a device name is followed by a hash sign (``#''), the hash sign
must be replaced by a unit number.
.TP 10
std
the standard devices (console, drum, fd/*, klog, kmem, mem, null, stderr,
stdin, stdout, tty)
.br
.ns
.TP 10
local
configuration specific devices
.br
.ns
.TP 10
ct#
HP300 HP-IB cartridge tape
.br
.ns
.TP 10
cd#
``concatenated'' pseudo-disks
.br
.ns
.TP 10
rd#
HP300 HP-IB disks
.br
.ns
.TP 10
sd#
HP300 SCSI disks
.br
.ns
.TP 10
vnd#
``file'' pseudo-disks
.br
.ns
.TP 10
dca#
HP200/300 single port serial interface
.br
.ns
.TP 10
dcm#
HP200/300 4 port serial mux interface
.br
.ns
.TP 10
pty#
set of 16 master and slave pseudo terminals
.br
.ns
.TP 10
flog#
kernel logging device
.br
.ns
.TP 10
grf#
raw interface to HP300 graphics devices
.br
.ns
.TP 10
ite#
terminal emulator interface to HP300 graphics devices
.br
.ns
.TP 10
hil
HP300 HIL input devices
.SH FILES
/dev		The special file directory.
.SH SEE ALSO
.IR mknod (1), 
.IR intro (4),
.IR config (8),
.IR special (8)
