.\" Copyright (c) 1993 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to Berkeley by
.\" Bill Jolitz.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	@(#)externalconnect.3c	5.2 (Berkeley) 5/29/93
.\"
.TH EXTERNALCONNECT 3 "May 29, 1993"
.SH NAME
externalconnect \- initiate a connection to an external system or service
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.ft B
#include <phonenumber.h>
#include <connect.h>
.PP
.ft B
externalconnect(towhere, options, optslen)
struct connectdomain *towhere;
char *options;
int optlen;
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
Connect to an external system or service at an address specified by
.I towhere
using the options specified in
.I options,
which is of length
.I optlen.
.PP
The parameter
.I towhere
does not necessarily need to specify a complete final addres,
as in the case where
an outside modem of a specific type is requested and no dialing is
going to be done and all that is required is
just that a line
and a modem be allocated and prepared for use per options.
.PP
The parameter
.I options
points to a value-result buffer area where options are passed to the connector
program and optionally returned from the connectd(8C) daemon. The buffer should
be large enough to contain all expected string options that may be returned.
Options within this buffer are a sequence of null-terminated strings,
ending with the null string itself.
.SH "RETURN VALUE
This call if successful returns a file descriptor to a serial port or other
entity that
has been connected per the above parameters,
otherwise a \-1 is returned, and a more specific error
code is stored in \fIerrno\fP.
.SH "ERRORS
The call fails if:
.TP 20
[EADDRNOTAVAIL]
The specified address is not available on this machine.
.TP 20
[EAFNOSUPPORT]
Addresses in the specified address family cannot be used with this socket.
.TP 20
[ETIMEDOUT]
Connection establishment timed out without establishing a connection.
.TP 20
[ECONNREFUSED]
The attempt to connect was forcefully rejected.
.SH SEE ALSO
connectd(8), getphonenumberbyname(3), connector(5), lines(5), ttys(5)
