.\" Copyright (c) 1980, 1990 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" %sccs.include.redist.man%
.\"
.\"     @(#)cd.1	6.3 (Berkeley) %G%
.\"
.Dd 
.Dt CD 1
.Os BSD 4
.Sh NAME
.Nm cd
.Nd change working directory
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm cd
.Ar directory
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The cd utility changes the working directory
to
.Ar directory .
.Pp
The
.Ar directory
is an absolute or relative pathname
which becomes the new working directory.
The
interpretation of a relative pathname by cd depends
on the CDPATH environment variable (see below).
.Pp
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
The following environment variables affect the execution of
cd:
.Pp
.Tw Fl
.Tp Ev HOME
If
.Nm cd
is
invoked without arguments, the
.Ev HOME
environment variable is checked for a default
directory name. If
.Ev HOME
exists and contains
a directory name,
that directory becomes the new working directory.
.Tp Ev CDPATH
If the
.Ar directory
operand does not
begin with a slash (/) character, and the first
component is not dot (.) or dot-dot (..),
.Nm cd
searches for
the directory relative to each directory named in the
.Ev CDPATH
variable, in the order listed.
The new
working directory is set to the first matching
directory found.
An empty string in place of a
directory pathname represents the current directory.
.Nm Cd
will print the pathname of the new working directory if it
was an element of
.Ev CDPATH .
See
.Xr csh 1
for info on environment variables.
.Tp
.Pp
The
.Nm cd
utility exits 0 on success, and >0 if an error occurs.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr csh 1 ,
.Xr sh 1 ,
.Xr pwd 1 ,
.Xr chdir 2
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.Nm cd
function is expected to be POSIX 1003.2 compatible.
