.TH MACPUT local "31 July 1984"
.UC 4
.SH NAME
macput \- send file to macintosh via modem7/macterminal
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B macput
file
.br
.B macput
[
.B \-rdu
] file
[
.B \-t
type
]
[
.B \-a
author
]
[
.B \-n
name
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Macput
sends a file to a Macintosh running MacTerminal.
The File Transfer settings should specify the "Modem7"
transfer method and a "MacTerminal" remote system.
This program is designed for use with the 0.5 Beta and newer
versions of MacTerminal, but includes a compatibility option for the
older -0.15X Almost-Alpha version.
.PP
To use this program, log into the unix system using MacTerminal,
and run macput specifying the desired options and one file to be sent.
If MacTerminal is properly configured, it will recognize that a file
is arriving on the serial line and put up an indicator showing how
much of the file has been sent.
Several Control-X's may be used to force macput
to give up if the transfer fails.
.PP
If none of the
.B \-rdu
flags are specified, 
.I macput 
sends three files to the mac:
.IB file .info ,
.IB file .data ,
and
.IB file .rsrc .
This is useful for returning files to the mac which were stored
using macget.
.PP
The
.B \-r
flag specifies 
.I resource
mode.
Either
.IB file .rsrc
or
.I file
will be sent to the Mac, along with a forged
.B .info
file and an empty 
.B .data
file.
The file sent becomes the resource fork of the Mac file.
.PP
The
.B \-d
flag specifies 
.I data
mode.
Either
.IB file .data
,
.IB file .text
or
.I file
will be sent to the Mac, along with a forged
.B .info
file and an empty 
.B .rsrc
file.
The file sent becomes the data fork of the Mac file.
.PP
The 
.B \-u
flag requests 
.I unix
mode, which is the same as 
.I data
mode except unix newline characters are converted
into carriage returns.
Human-readable unix text files sent to the Mac using this option 
will be compatible with applications which expect "text only" files.
.PP
The 
.B \-o
flag specifies "old" (version -0.15X) MacTerminal compatibility mode.
You must manually disable XON/XOFF flow control in this version to
perform file transfer; this is done automatically in the newer versions.
.PP
The remaining options serve to override the default
file type, author, and file name to be used on the Mac.
The default type and author for 
.I resource
mode are "APPL" and "CCOM".
.I data
mode defaults are "TEXT", "????", and 
.I unix
mode defaults are "TEXT" and "MACA".
.SH SEE ALSO
macget(local)
.SH BUGS
Doesn't work over flow controlled communication lines,
or when using rlogin.
.PP
Doesn't set the bundle bit on resource files,
to incorporate any icons into the Desk Top.
Use setfile to set the bundle bit.
.SH FEATURES
Properly initializes the Creation Date.
.SH AUTHOR
Dave Johnson, Brown 7/31/84
