.TH FORMAT 8 4/26/81
.UC 4
.SH NAME
format \- how to format disks
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
Warning:  These instructions are for people with 11/780 CPU's.  We don't
know how to do this for 11/750 cpus (yet at least), you'll have to
figure it out yourself; if you do call us and tell us how.
.PP
The formatting procedures are different for each type of disk.  Listed
here are the formatting procedures for RK07's, RP0X, RM0X and Emulex Unibus
Disks.
.PP
You should shut down UNIX and halt the machine to do any disk formatting.
Make certain you put in the pack you want formatted.  It is also a good idea
to spin down or write protect the disks you don't want to format, just in case.
.PP
.B Formatting a RK07.
Load the floppy labled, "RX11 VAX DSK LD DEV #1" in the floppy disk drive,
and type the following commands:
.nf
	>>>BOOT
	DIAGNOSTIC SUPERVISOR.  ZZ-ESSAA-X5.0-119  23-JAN-1980 12:44:40.03
	DS>ATTACH DW780 SBI DW0 3 5
	DS>ATTACH RK07 DW0 DMA0
	DS>SELECT DMA0
	DS>LOAD EVRAC
	DS>START/SEC:PACKINIT
.fi
.PP
.B Formatting a RP0X.
Follow the above procedures except that the ATTACH and SELECT lines should
read.
.nf
	DS>ATTACH RH780 SBI RH0 8 5
	DS>ATTACH RP0X RH0 DBA0		(RP0X is, e.g. RP06)
	DS>SELECT DBA0
.fi
.PP
This is for drive 0 on mba0; use 9 instead of 8 for mba1, etc.
.PP
.B Formatting a RM0X.
Follow the above procedures except that the ATTACH and SELECT lines should
read.
.nf
	DS>ATTACH RH780 SBI RH0 8 5
	DS>ATTACH RM0X RH0 DRA0
	DS>SELECT DRA0
.fi
.PP
.B Formatting an Emulex Unibus Disk.
Type these commands on the console:
.nf
	>>>SET REL:2013FDC0
	>>>SET DEF WORD
	>>>SET DEF OCT
	>>>SET DEF PHYS
	>>>U
	>>>I
	>>>D/P 10 0
	>>>D/P 0 21
	>>>D/P 36 177777
	>>>D/P 0 77
	(figure out when it is done)
	>>>SET REL:0
	>>>SET DEF LONG
	>>>SET DEF HEX
.fi
.PP
Once a disk is formatted, you'll still have to build file systems on it
with mkfs(8) before you can use it with UNIX.
.PP
Don't forget to put your UNIX console floppy back
in the floppy disk drive.
.SH SEE ALSO
bad144(8), badsect(8), mkfs(8)
