.\" Copyright (c) 1990 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to Berkeley by
.\" the Systems Programming Group of the University of Utah Computer
.\" Science Department.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms are permitted provided
.\" that: (1) source distributions retain this entire copyright notice and
.\" comment, and (2) distributions including binaries display the following
.\" acknowledgement:  ``This product includes software developed by the
.\" University of California, Berkeley and its contributors'' in the
.\" documentation or other materials provided with the distribution and in
.\" all advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software.
.\" Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors may
.\" be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\" specific prior written permission.
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'' AND WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.\"
.\"	@(#)rbootd.8	5.1 (Berkeley) 6/29/90
.\"
.TH RBOOTD 8 "June 29, 1990"
.UC 7
.SH NAME
rbootd \- HP remote boot server
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rbootd
[\-a] [\-d] [ConfigFile]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Rbootd
services boot requests from Hewlett-Packard workstations over a
local area network.
All boot files must reside in the boot file directory; further, if a
client supplies path information in its boot request, it will be
silently stripped away before processing.
By default,
.I rbootd
only responds to requests from machines listed in its configuration
file.
.PP
.I Rbootd
supports the following command line options:
.TP
.B \-a
Respond to boot requests from any machine.  With this option,
the configuration file is ignored.
.TP
.B \-d
Run server in debug mode.  Packets sent and
received are displayed to the terminal.
.TP
.B ConfigFile
Specify a different configuration file.
.PP
The configuration file consists of ascii text where each line describes
a particular machine.  A line must start with a machines'
.I ethernet address
followed by an optional list of
.I boot file names.
An ethernet address is specified in hexadecimal with each of its six
octets separated by a colon.  The boot file names come from the boot
file directory.
The ethernet address and boot file(s) must be separated
by white-space and/or commas.  A pound sign causes the remainder of
a line to be ignored.  Here is a sample configuration file:
.in +4
.nf

.ta \w'08:00:09:01:C6:75  'u +\w'SYSHPBSD,SYSHPUX  'u +\w'# jaguar (either)'u
#
# ethernet addr	boot file(s)	comments
#
08:00:09:0:66:ad	SYSHPBSD	# snake (4.3BSD)
08:00:09:0:59:5b		# vandy (anything)
8::9:1:C6:75	SYSHPBSD,SYSHPUX	# jaguar (either)
.DT
.fi
.in
.PP
.I Rbootd
logs status and error messages via
.I syslog.
A startup message is always logged, and in the case of fatal
errors (or deadly signals) a message is logged announcing the
server's termination.  In general, a non-fatal error is handled
by ignoring the event that caused it (e.g. an invalid Ethernet
address in the config file causes that line to be invalidated).
.PP
The following signals have the specified effect when sent to
the server process using the kill(1) command.
.IP SIGHUP
Drop all active connections and reconfigure.
.IP SIGUSR1
Turn on debugging, do nothing if already on.  (SIGEMT on older systems
without SIGUSR1)
.IP SIGUSR2
Turn off debugging, do nothing if already off.  (SIGFPE on older systems
without SIGUSR2)
.SH "FILES"
.PD 0
.TP 22
/etc/rbootd.conf
configuration file
.TP
/usr/lib/rbootd
directory containing boot files
.TP
/etc/rbootd.pid
process id
.TP
/usr/tmp/rbootd.dbg
debug output
.PD
.SH "SEE ALSO"
kill(1), socket(2), signal(3C), syslog(3), rmp(4)
.SH "AUTHOR"
Jeff Forys, University of Utah
.SH "BUGS"
.TP 2
\-
If more than one server is started, both will receive and respond
to the same boot packets.
