.\" Copyright (c) 1989 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms are permitted
.\" provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
.\" duplicated in all such forms and that any documentation,
.\" advertising materials, and other materials related to such
.\" distribution and use acknowledge that the software was developed
.\" by the University of California, Berkeley.  The name of the
.\" University may not be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\" from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'' AND WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.\"
.\"	@(#)man.1	6.8 (Berkeley) %G%
.\"
.TH MAN 1 ""
.UC 4
.SH NAME
man \- display the on-line manual pages
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.ft B
man [-acw] [-M path] [-m path] [section] title ...
.ft R
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Man
displays the UNIX manual pages.
.PP
The options are as follows:
.TP
.I a
Display all of the manual pages for a specified
.IR title .
(Normally, only the first manual page found is displayed.)
.TP
.I c
Copy the manual page to the standard output instead of using
.I more (1)
to paginate it.
This is done by default if the standard output is not a terminal device.
.TP
.I M
Override the list of standard directories where
.I man
searches for manual pages.
The supplied
.I path
must be a colon (``:'') separated list of directories.
This search path may also be set using the environmental variable
.IR MANPATH .
.TP
.I m
Augment the list of standard directories where
.I man
searches for manual pages.
The supplied
.I path
must be a colon (``:'') separated list of directories.
These directories will be searched before the standard directories or
the directories supplied with the
.I M
option or the
.I MANPATH
environmental variable are searched.
.TP
.I w
List the locations of the manual pages that
.I man
would display for the specified
.IR title .
.PP
Section numbers restrict the portions of the manual that
.I man
will search to a single section.
The section number should be a number, ``1'' through ``8'', or ``3f''
to specify the FORTRAN versions of section 3 of the manual.
If no section number is given,
.I man
will search the sections in the following order:
``1'', ``8'', ``6'', ``2'', ``3'', ``4'', ``5'', ``7'' and ``3f''.
This is to give precedence to commands over library subroutines.
.SH "ENVIRONMENTAL VARIABLES"
.TP
.I
MACHINE
As some manual pages are intended only for use on certain architectures,
.I man
only searches the directories applicable to the current machine.
.I Man's
determination of the current machine type may be overridden by setting
the environmental variable
.I MACHINE
to the name of an architecture.
Currently supported architectures are ``tahoe'' and ``vax''.
Machine specific areas are checked before general areas.
.TP
.I MANPATH
The standard search path used by
.I man
may be overridden by specifying a path in the
.I MANPATH
environmental variable.
The format of the path is a colon (``:'') separated list of directories.
.TP
.I
PAGER
Any value of the environmental variable
.I PAGER
will be used instead of the standard pagination program
.IR more (1).
.SH FILES
/etc/man.config	standard directory search path
.SH "SEE ALSO"
apropos(1), whatis(1), whereis(1), man.config(5)
.SH BUGS
The on-line manual pages are, by necessity, forgiving toward stupid
display devices, causing some manual pages to not be as good as their
typeset counterparts.
