.TH MKNF 8 "University of Illinois"
.SH NAME
mknf, rmnf - create and delete notesfiles
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mknf
[
.B "-aon"
]
topic [ ... ]
.PP
.B rmnf
[
.B "-f"
]
topic [ ... ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Mknf
and 
.I rmnf
create and delete notesfiles respectively.
The same parameters apply for each: 
the `topic' is the name that the notesfile is known by.
.PP
As 
.I mknf
processes its arguments, creating new notesfiles, the name of each
new notesfile is echoed to the terminal.
The new notesfiles are closed and
the 
.I "notesfile owner"
is made the sole director.
He customarily turns control over to the user requesting the notesfile
by making that person a director.
.PP
The 
.B "-aon"
options apply to
.I "mknf"
only.
They signify that the notesfiles created are to permit anonymous notes,
be open, and be networked respectively.
.PP
If the file `/usr/spool/notes/.utilities/access-template'
is present,
it contains a list of access-rights which are added to
the created notesfile.
The file contains lines of access-rights similar to 
those used in the
.IR "nfaccess" "(8)"
command.
In environments with dynamic creation of notesfiles, such as on
USENET nodes,
one or more users can automatically be made directors of
all new notesfiles.
If appropriate, they can be removed from the access list
of newly created notesfiles as needed.
.PP
.I Rmnf
asks for verification of each notesfile before deleting it. 
The notesfile is deleted if the response line begins with a `y'.
If invoked with the
.B "-f"
option,
.I rmnf
does not ask for verification before deleting the notesfiles.
.PP
Only the 
.I "notesfile owner"
is allowed to run 
.I mknf
and
.I "rmnf."
.SH BUGS
.I "Rmnf"
doesn't understand about absolute pathnames for notesfiles.
It refuses to remove notesfiles specified by absolute pathnames.
.PP
Any user should be allowed to create private notesfiles in
directories where he has permission.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 40
/usr/spool/notes/.utilities
where these programs live.
.TP 40
/usr/spool/notes/.utilities/access-template
Default access-list.
.TP 40
/usr/spool/notes
Default notesfile directory.
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
nfaccess(8),
nfxmit(8),
notes(1),
.br
.ul
The Notesfile Reference Manual
.SH AUTHORS
.nf
Ray Essick (uiucdcs!essick, essick%uiuc@csnet-relay.arpa)
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL
.sp
Rob Kolstad (kolstad@convex.UUCP)
CONVEX Computer Corporation
Richardson, TX
.fi
