.TH NFACCESS 8 "University of Illinois"
.SH NAME
nfaccess \- Add access rights to a set of Notesfiles
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nfaccess
access-right
topic
[ topic ... ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Nfaccess
simplifies the task of adding an access-right to many notesfiles.
The function is somewhat analagous to that of 
.IR "chmod" "(1)."
.PP
The 
.I "access-right"
specifies a user, group or system and the permissions to be
granted.
The format is:

.in +1i
.nf
<access-right>	::= [<type>:]name=<mode>
<type>	::= {User, user, Group, group, System, system}
<mode>	::= {d, r, w, a, n}+
.fi
.in

The
.I type
specification can be omitted;
when it is omitted, the name is assumed to be a user.
The 
.I mode
is additive.
A mode of ``rw'' specifies read and write.
The ``n'' mode specifies null access.
.PP
The new access right is inserted in each specified notesfiles
access list.
If the user/group/system already has an entry, the old entry
is replaced with the new entry.
.PP
All users are allowed to run this program.
The changes are only applied to notesfiles for which the executing
user is a director.
.PP
This program lives in the notesfile utility directory,
typically ``/usr/spool/notes/.utilities''.
.PP
To automatically add specific access-rights to newly created
notesfiles, the file ``/usr/spool/notes/.utilities/access-template''
is useful.
If it exists, the file contains lines of acces-rights which
are added to each notesfile as it is created.
If several people share the administration of the notesfile
system, each can be added to the access-lists of newly
created notesfiles
by placing appropriate lines in this file.
.SH EXAMPLES
.in +1i
nfaccess essick=drw /usr/spool/notes/*
.br
nfaccess group:srg=rw this that other
.br
nfaccess user:kolstad=rw mynotes
.in
.PP
In the first example, user `essick' is given director/read/write
access to all the notesfiles in /usr/spool/notes.
Any permissions (or restrictions) he might have had before
are overridden.
The second example gives group `srg' read/write access to 
notesfiles `this', `that' and `other'.
In the final example, user `kolstad' is given read/write access
to the notesfile `mynotes'.
.SH BUGS
Entries can not be removed from the access list with
this program.
.PP
Entries can not merely be augmented (``just add write permission'')
with this program.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 35
/etc/passwd
for the users name
.TP 35
/etc/group
for the users group
.TP 35
/usr/spool/notes
the default notesfile data base
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
mknf(8),
notes(1),
nfcomment(3),
.br
.ul
The Notesfile Reference Manual
.SH AUTHORS
.nf
Ray Essick (uiucdcs!essick, essick%uiuc@csnet-relay.arpa)
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL
.fi
