.TH NFXMIT 8 "University of Illinois"
.SH NAME
nfxmit, nfrcv - notesfile networking programs
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nfxmit
.BR "-d" "site"
[
.B "-r"
] [
.B "-a"
] [
.B "-i"
] [
.B "-t"
.I "date-spec"
]
[
.B "-f"
file
]
topic [ ... ]
.PP
.B nfrcv
topic
fromsystem
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Nfxmit
and
.I nfrcv
implement networking of notesfiles.
The
.I nfxmit
program packages eligible new articles
and sends them to a remote system.
.I Nfrcv
is the receiving end of this team.
.PP
.I "Nfxmit"
sends the specified notesfiles to the
.I "site"
specified with the
.B "-d"
option.
The 
.B "-r"
option specifies that a request should be queued for the
remote site to transmit updates from its copies of the notesfiles
sent.
The 
.B "-r" 
option is used only if the other site does not automatically queue
updates of the notesfile.
.PP
Specify 
.B "-a"
to have articles which originated in
.IR news (1)
sent.
News(1)-originated articles will usually reach each system via the
news program.
.PP
The 
.B "-i"
option indicates that
.I nfxmit
is to send articles to the destination that it normally would
not send.
These articles are those that were written there or were
received at the local site from that particular site.
The
.B "-i"
option is separate from the timestamp functions.
Articles are first selected on the basis of the time received
and criteria for having passed through news
or the destination system are applied later.
.PP
A timestamp of the last transmission of each notesfile to each system is
maintained. This is used for determining the notes to send.
If a different timestamp is desired,
use the
.B "-t"
option.
The supplied timestamp is used for this transfer and the
stored timestamp is updated.
.PP
Specify
.B "-f"
.I "myfile"
on the command line to have
.I "nfxmit"
read 
.I "myfile" 
for a list of notesfiles to be sent.
This is useful if the number of notesfiles is too numerous to list on a 
single command line.
The shell meta-characters
.I "*, ?, [,"
and
.I "]"
are recognized in both the 
.I topic
parameter and the entries in
.I "myfile."
.PP
.I "Nfxmit"
uses uux(I) to invoke 
.I "nfrcv" 
on the remote system in order to process the incoming notes.
Non-uucp connections are supported and specified in
the file
.I "/usr/spool/notes/.utilities/net.how"
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 45
/usr/spool/notes/.utilities/net.how
specifies connection methods between systems
.TP 45
/usr/spool/notes/.utilities/net.alias
directory containing mapping of local and
remote notesfile names
.TP 45
/usr/spool/notes/.sequencer/Sy:\fIsysname\fP
Seqeuncing timestamps for 
.IR sysname "."
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
news(1),
notes(1),
nfcomment(3),
uucp(1),
.br
.ul
The Notesfile Reference Manual
.SH AUTHORS
.nf
Ray Essick (uiucdcs!essick, essick%uiuc@csnet-relay.arpa)
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL
.sp
Rob Kolstad (kolstad@convex.UUCP)
CONVEX Computer Corporation
Richardson, TX
.fi
