.\" Copyright (c) 1980 Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.  The Berkeley software License Agreement
.\" specifies the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.\"
.\"	@(#)rv.4	4.1 (Berkeley) %G%
.\"
.TH RV 4 
.UC 4
.SH NAME
rv \- Racal/Vadic ACU interface
.SH DESCRIPTION
The racal/vadic ACU interface is provided by the files
.I /dev/cua[01]
which is a multiplexed file, and by the daemon
.I dnd
which monitors the file, simulating a standard DN dialer.
To place an outgoing call one forks a sub-process
trying to open
.I /dev/cul?
and then opens the corresponding file
.I /dev/cua?
file and writes a number on it.
The daemon translates the call to proper format for the
Racal/Vadic interface, and monitors the progress of the call
recording accounting information for later use.
.PP
The codes for the phone numbers are the same as in the DN interface:
.TP
0-9
dial 0-9
.br
.ns
.TP
.B :
dial *
.br
.ns
.TP
.B ;
dial #
.br
.ns
.TP
\-
delay for second dial tone
.br
.ns
.TP
<
end-of-number
.PP
The entire telephone number must be
presented in a single
.I write
system call.
.PP
It is require that an end-of-number
code be given.
.DT
.SH FILES
/dev/cua0	virtual dialer for 300 baud dialout
.br
/dev/cua1	virtual dialer for 1200 baud dialout
.br
/dev/cul0	the terminal which is connected to the 300 baud dialout
.br
/dev/cul1	the terminal which is connected to the 1200 baud dialout
.br
/usr/adm/dnacct	Accounting records for sucessfully completed calls.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
cu(1), uucp(1)
.SH BUGS
Locking problems.
.PP
The multiplexor seems to have rare-case bugs which occasinally crash
the system taking trap type 9's, usually in the
.I sdata
system routine.
