.\" Copyright (c) 1983 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms are permitted provided
.\" that: (1) source distributions retain this entire copyright notice and
.\" comment, and (2) distributions including binaries display the following
.\" acknowledgement:  ``This product includes software developed by the
.\" University of California, Berkeley and its contributors'' in the
.\" documentation or other materials provided with the distribution and in
.\" all advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software.
.\" Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors may
.\" be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\" specific prior written permission.
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'' AND WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.\"
.\"	@(#)services.5	6.5 (Berkeley) 6/23/90
.\"
.TH SERVICES 5  "June 23, 1990"
.UC 5
.SH NAME
services \- service name data base
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I services
file contains information regarding
the known services available in the DARPA Internet.
For each service a single line should be present
with the following information:
.HP 10
official service name
.br
.ns
.HP 10
port number
.br
.ns
.HP 10
protocol name
.br
.ns
.HP 10
aliases
.PP
Items are separated by any number of blanks and/or
tab characters.  The port number and protocol name
are considered a single 
.IR item ;
a ``/'' is used to
separate the port and protocol (e.g. ``512/tcp'').
A ``#'' indicates the beginning of
a comment; subsequent characters up to the end of the line are
not interpreted by the routines which search the file.
.PP
Service names may contain any printable
character other than a field delimiter, newline,
or comment character.
.SH FILES
/etc/services
.SH "SEE ALSO"
getservent(3)
.SH BUGS
A name server should be used instead of a static file.
