.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" %sccs.include.proprietary.roff%
.\"
.\"	@(#)plot.3	8.1 (Berkeley) %G%
.\"
.TH PLOT 3F ""
.UC 6
.SH NAME
plot: openpl et al. \- f77 library interface to \fIplot\fR (3X)
libraries.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B subroutine openpl()
.PP
.B subroutine erase()
.PP
.B subroutine label(str)
.B character str*(*)
.PP
.B subroutine line(ix1, iy1, ix2, iy2)
.PP
.B subroutine box(ix1, iy1, ix2, iy2)
.fi
Draw a rectangle and leave the cursor at (
.IR ix2 , iy2 ).
.nf
.PP
.B subroutine circle(ix, iy, ir)
.PP
.B
subroutine arc(ix, iy, ix0, iy0, ix1, iy1)
.PP
.B subroutine move(ix, iy)
.PP
.B subroutine cont(ix, iy)
.PP
.B subroutine point(ix, iy)
.PP
.B subroutine linemd(str)
.B character str*(*)
.PP
.B subroutine space(ix0, iy0, ix1, iy1)
.PP
.B subroutine clospl()
.fi
.PP
.ft R
.SH DESCRIPTION
These are interface subroutines, in the library
.IR -lf77plot ,
allowing
.I f77
users to call the 
.IR plot (3X)
graphics routines
which generate graphic output in a relatively
device-independent manner.
The
.I f77
subroutine names are the same as the
.I C
function names except that
.I linemod
and
.I closepl
have been shortened to
.I linemd
and
.I clospl .
See
.IR  plot (5)
and
.IR  plot (3X)
for a description
of their effect.
.PP
Only the first 255 character in string arguments to
.I label
and
.I linemd
are used.
.PP
This library must be specified in the
.IR f77 (1)
command before the device specific graphics library;
for example, to compile and load a FORTRAN program in
.I prog.f
to run on a Tektronix 4014 terminal:
.br
.RS

.B f77 prog.f -lf77plot -l4014

.RE
.br
See
.IR plot (3X)
for a complete list of device specific plotting libraries.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
plot(5), plot(1G), plot(3X), graph(1G)
