.\" Copyright (c) 1980, 1990 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms are permitted provided
.\" that: (1) source distributions retain this entire copyright notice and
.\" comment, and (2) distributions including binaries display the following
.\" acknowledgement:  ``This product includes software developed by the
.\" University of California, Berkeley and its contributors'' in the
.\" documentation or other materials provided with the distribution and in
.\" all advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software.
.\" Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors may
.\" be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without
.\" specific prior written permission.
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'' AND WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)liszt.1	6.2 (Berkeley) 6/24/90
.\"
.Dd June 24, 1990
.Dt LISZT 1
.Os BSD 4
.Sh NAME
.Nm liszt
.Nd compile a Franz Lisp program
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm liszt
.Op Fl mpqruwxCQST
.Op Fl e Ar form
.Op Fl o Ar objfile
.Op Ar name
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm Liszt
takes a file whose names ends in `.l' and compiles the FRANZ
LISP
code there leaving an object program on the file whose name is that of the
source with `.o' substituted for `.l'.
.Pp
The following options are interpreted by
.Nm liszt .
.Tw Fl
.Tp Fl e
Evaluate the given form before compilation begins.
.Tp Fl m
Compile a MACLISP
file, by changing the readtable to conform to
MACLISP
syntax and including a macro-defined compatibility package.
.Tp Fl o
Put the object code in the specified file, rather than the default `.o' file.
.Tp Fl p
places profiling code at the beginning of each non-local function.
If the lisp system is also created with profiling in it, this allows
function calling frequency to be determined (see
.Xr prof  1  . )
.Tp Fl q
Only print warning and error messages.
Compilation statistics and notes on correct but unusual constructs
will not be printed.
.Tp Fl r
place bootstrap code at the beginning of the object file, which when
the object file is executed will cause a lisp system to be invoked
and the object file fasl'ed in.
.Tp Fl u
Compile a UCI-lispfile, by changing the readtable to conform to
UCI-Lisp syntax and including a macro-defined compatibility package.
.Tp Fl w
Suppress warning diagnostics.
.Tp Fl x
Create a lisp cross reference file with the same name as the source
file but with  `.x' appended.
The program
.Xr lxref  1
reads this file and creates a human readable cross
reference listing.
.Tp Fl C
put comments in the assembler output of the compiler. Useful
for debugging the compiler.
.Tp Fl Q
Print compilation statistics and warn of strange constructs.
This is the default.
.Tp Fl S
Compile the named program and leave the assembler-language output on
the corresponding file suffixed `.s'.
This will also prevent the assembler language file from being assembled.
.Tp Fl T
send the assembler output to standard output.
.Tp
.Pp
If
no source file is specified, then the compiler will run interactively.
You will find yourself talking to the
.Xr lisp  1
top-level command interpreter.
You can compile a file by using the
function
.Nm liszt
(an nlambda) with the same arguments as you use on the command line.
For example to compile `foo', a MACLISP
file, you would use:
.Pp
.Dl (liszt \-m foo)
.Pp
Note that
.Nm liszt
supplies the ``.l'' extension for you.
.Sh FILES
.Dw /usr/lib/lisp/machacks.l
.Di L
.Dp Pa /usr/lib/lisp/machacks.l
MACLISP
compatibility package
.Dp Pa /usr/lib/lisp/syscall.l
macro definitions of Unix system calls
.Dp Pa /usr/lib/lisp/ucifnc.l
UCI Lisp compatibility package
.Dp
.Sh AUTHOR
John Foderaro
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr lisp 1 ,
.Xr lxref 1
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Nm Liszt
checks these
environment variables;
.Ev PATH ,
.Ev SHELL
and
.Ev TERM .
.Sh HISTORY
.Nm Lisp
appeared in 3 BSD.
