.TH XAPOLLO 8 "3O October 1986" "X Version 10"
.SH NAME
Xapollo - X window system Apollo implementation notes
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
The Apollo X server can be started as a command to /bin/csh.  It 
requires two arguments, both of which should be 0.  Normally, however, the server should be 
started by invoking 
.IR xinit (1).
.PP
The device dependent portion of the server is implemented using 
.B GPR
system calls, and is known to work on DN300, DN330, DN560, DN660, and DN3000
systems,  all running SR9.2.
.PP

.PP
.SH "SEE ALSO"
X(1)
.br
`Xlib - C Language X Interface'
.br
`ddX - Device Dependent X Interface'
.SH AUTHOR
Mark Swanson
.br
Copyright (c) 1986 by University of Utah.

Much of the initial work was done by Doug Orr.
.SH BUGS
.PP
Restrictions in the current implementation:
.IP \-
Brush shapes are ignored and all result in 1x1 brush.
.IP \-
The labelled control and shift keys do not affect the mouse buttons;  the keys
LD, LE, and LF have been pressed into service to provide control, meta, and 
shift, respectively, for the mouse buttons.  The "POP" key also serves as a 
general meta key.  Should the server become "wedged", typing shift F8 will
terminate
the server.
.IP \-
Apollo fonts impose restrictions on the number of characters (127) and their
maximum size;  thus, some fonts cannot be converted to Apollo format and
performance using them is badly degraded.  Those fonts that can be converted
to Apollo format should be converted using the cvtfont program.
.IP \-
XY masks (for defining non-rectangular clipping regions or "stencils") are
not implemented.
.IP \-
No SHIFT LOCK key is implementd.
.IP \-
Only down events are available for the standard "printable" keys.
.IP \-
Up- and Down-events for the normal Control and Shift keys are simulated, as
these keys do not correspond to separate GPR events.
.IP \-
The csh invoking xinit should not have inprocess set.  This will cause the
initial xterm process to hang.
