.TH XIS 8C "14 July 1986" "X Version 10"
.SH NAME
.B Xis
\- X window system Integrated Solutions Optimum V WorkStation implementation notes
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
The Integrated Solutions X server cannot be started by \f3init\f1(8);
it must be started as a command from a normal shell window or
desktop icon.  
The Integrated Solutions X server should be started by \f3xinit\f1(1),
using the following command
.sp
.nf
	\f3xinit -- Xis 0\f1
.fi
.sp
The initial Integrated Solutions drivers use the \f2libgip\f1
library to address the device, and runs on 
monochrome and color displays.  The drivers work with the 3.06 release
or greater.
.SH FILES
/dev/X*	UNIX domain socket
.SH "SEE ALSO"
\f2Optimum V WorkStation X Window System Manual\f1
.br
\f3dm\f1(1), \f3X\f1(1), \f3xinit\f1(1), \f3X\f1(8c)
.SH AUTHORS
David Ferguson
.br
Bruce Sanders
.br
Copyright \(co 1986, Integrated Solutions
.SH BUGS
.PP
The server can address only one display; this is a restriction of the
X system itself and is not likely to change soon.
.PP
The drivers at present have some restrictions, most of which
should be removed in future versions:
.IP \(bu
Dashed lines are drawn as solid.
.IP \(bu
Filling a polygon is not implemented.
.IP \(bu
Up events are not available for any keys on the keyboard.
.IP \(bu
SHIFT/SHIFT_LOCK/CTRL/META keys are implemented using the PF[1-4] on
the keypad, respectively.  Pressing one of these keys once sends a 
key-down and the second press sends a key-up transition.  Pressing any
other keys on the keyboard effectively sends key-up for any keys that
are logically down.
.IP \(bu
Time stamps on mouse input are not implemented.
