.TH MAN 1 9/23/79
.UC
.SH NAME
man \- run off section of UNIX manual
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B man
[
.B \-
] [
.B \-t
] [
section
]
title ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Man
is a program which prints sections of the manual.
.I Section
is an option arabic section number, i.e. 3,
which may be followed by a single letter classifier, i.e. 1m
indicating a maintenance type program in section 1.
It may also be
``ucb'',
``new'',
``sccs'',
``junk'',
or
``public''.
If a section specifier is given
.I man
looks in the that section of the manual for the given
.I titles.
If
.I section
is omitted,
.I man
searches all sections of the manual, giving preference to commands
over subroutines in system libraries, and printing the first section
it finds, if any.
The command
.IR apropos (1)
can help find a command whose name has been forgotten,
looking it up by kewords in its ``one line'' description.
.PP
If the standard output is a teletype, or if the flag
.B \-
is given, then
.I man
pipes its output through
.IR ssp (1)
to crush out useless blank lines,
.IR ul (1)
to create proper underlines for different terminals,
and through
.IR more (1)
to stop after each page on the screen.
Hit a carriage return to continue,
a control-D to scroll 12 more lines when the output stops.
.PP
The
.B \-t
flag causes
.I man
to arrange for the specified section to be
.I troff'ed
to the Versatec.
.SH FILES
/usr/man/man?/*
.SH SEE\ ALSO
apropos(1), more(1), ul(1), ssp(1), whereis(1)
.SH AUTHOR
William Joy
.SH BUGS
The manual is supposed to be reproducible either on the phototypesetter
or on a typewriter.
However, on a typewriter some information is necessarily lost.
