.TH SA 1M 
.SH NAME
sa, accton \- system accounting
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sa
[
.B \-abcjlnrstuv
] [ file ]
.PP
.B /etc/accton 
[ file ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
With an argument naming an existing
.I file,
.I accton
causes system accounting information for
every process executed to be placed at the end of the file.
If no arguemnt is given, accounting is turned off.
.PP
.I Sa
reports on, cleans up, and generally maintains
accounting files.
.PP
.I Sa
is able to condense
the information in
.I /usr/adm/acct
into a summary file
.I /usr/adm/savacct
which contains a count of the
number of times each command was called and the time resources
consumed.
This condensation is desirable because on a large system
.I /usr/adm/acct
can grow by 100 blocks per day.
The summary file is read before the accounting file,
so the reports include all available information.
.PP
If a file name is given as the last argument,
that file will be treated
as the accounting file;
.I /usr/adm/acct
is the default.
There are zillions of options:
.PP
.TP
a
Place all command names containing unprintable characters
and those used only once under the name `***other.'
.TP
b
Sort output by sum of user and system time divided by number of
calls.
Default sort is by sum of user and system times.
.TP
c
Besides total user, system, and real time for each command print percentage
of total time over all commands.
.TP
j
Instead of total minutes time for each category,
give seconds per call.
.TP
l
Separate system and user time; normally they are combined.
.TP
m
Print number of processes and number of CPU minutes for each user.
.TP
n
Sort by number of calls.
.TP
r
Reverse order of sort.
.TP
s
Merge accounting file into summary file
.I /usr/adm/savacct
when done.
.TP
t
For each command report ratio of real time to the sum of user and
system times.
.TP
u
Superseding all other flags,
print for each command in the accounting file the
user ID and command name.
.TP
v
If the next character is a digit
.I n,
then type the name of
each command used
.I n
times or fewer.
Await a reply from the terminal;
if it begins with `y', add the command to
the category `**junk**.'
This is used to strip out garbage.
.dt
.SH FILES
.ta 2i
/usr/adm/acct	raw accounting
.br
/usr/adm/savacct	summary
.br
/usr/adm/usracct	per-user summary
.SH "SEE ALSO"
ac(1), acct(2)
