.\" Copyright (c) 1991, 1992, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" %sccs.include.redist.roff%
.\"
.\"	@(#)MAKEDEV.8	8.2 (Berkeley) %G%
.\"
.Dd 
.Dt MAKEDEV 8 hp300
.Os 4.3
.Sh NAME
.Nm MAKEDEV 
.Nd create system and device special files
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm MAKEDEV
.Ar device_name Ar ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The shell script
.Nm MAKEDEV ,
found in the
.Pa /dev
directory, is used to create the common special
files.
See
.Xr special 8
for a more complete discussion of special files.
.Pp
.Nm MAKEDEV
takes any number of device names as arguments, where the names are
the common abbreviation for the device.
There are two special devices,
.Ar std
and
.Ar local .
The former creates the standard devices for the architecture.
The latter is for devices specific to the local site, and
executes the shell file
.Pa MAKEDEV.local .
.Pp
The
.Tn HP300
supports the following devices.
Where a device name is followed by a hash sign
.Ql \&# ,
the hash sign
must be replaced by a unit number.
.Bl -tag -width indent -compact
.It Ar std
the standard devices
.Pf ( Ar console ,
.Ar drum ,
.Ar fd/* ,
.Ar klog ,
.Ar kmem ,
.Ar mem ,
.Ar null ,
.Ar stderr ,
.Ar stdin ,
.Ar stdout ,
.Ar tty ) .
.It Ar  local
configuration specific devices.
.It Ar  ct#
HP300 HP-IB cartridge tape.
.It Ar  cd#
``concatenated'' pseudo-disks.
.It Ar  rd#
.Tn HP300
.Tn HP-IB
disks
.It Ar  sd#
HP300 SCSI disks.
.It Ar  vnd#
``file'' pseudo-disks.
.It Ar  dca#
.Tn HP200/300
single port serial interface.
.It Ar  dcm#
.Tn HP200/300
4 port serial mux interface.
.It Ar  pty#
set of 16 master and slave pseudo terminals.
.It Ar  flog#
kernel logging device.
.It Ar  grf#
raw interface to
.Tn HP300
graphics devices.
.It Ar  ite#
terminal emulator interface to
.Tn HP300
graphics devices.
.It Ar  hil
.Tn HP300
.Tn HIL
input devices.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width xxxx -compact
.It Pa /dev
The special file directory.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr mknod 1 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr config 8 ,
.Xr special 8
