.TH XCOLORS 1 "1 June 1986" "X Version 10"
.SH NAME
xcolors - X window system color database display
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B xcolors
[ option ] ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I xcolors
displays the colors defined in
.I X
window system color database.
.I xcolors
creates a window in which each color in the database is displayed along
with its name and hexadecimal rgb representation. The colors are roughly
sorted by color type. The mouse is used to change the colors of the
text, border and background by placing the cursor 
on the color desired and clicking the left, middle or right button.
.PP
.I xcolors
understands the following options:
.PP
.TP 8
.B \-bd \fIcolor\fP
Specify the border color; black is the default.
.PP
.TP 8
.B \-bg \fIcolor\fP
Specify the background color; black is the default.
.PP
.TP 8
.B \-bw \fIpixels\fP
Specify the width in pixels of the border around the
.I xcolors
window. The default value is 3 pixels.
.PP
.TP 8
.B \-fg \fIcolor\fP
Specify the text color; white is the default.
.PP
.TP 8
.B \-fn \fIfontname\fP
The text will be displayed in the specified font (if none
is specified, this defaults to 6x10).
.PP
.TP 8
.B =\fIgeometry\fP
The xcolors window is created with the specified
size and location
determined
by the supplied geometry specification.
See \fIX(1)\fP for a full explanation.
.PP
.TP 8
.B \[\fIhost\fP]:\[\fIdisplay\fP]
Normally,
.I xcolors
gets the host and display number to use from the environment
variable ``DISPLAY''.  Either or both can be specified with this option.
.I host
specifies which machine to create the
.I xcolors
window on, and
.I display
specifies the display number.
For example,
``hoser:0'' creates an
.I xcolors
on display 0 on machine hoser. Either value can be defaulted
by omission but ``:'' is necessary to specify one or both.
.SH X DEFAULTS
.PP
.TP 8
.B Background
Set the background color.
.PP
.TP 8
.B BodyFont
Set the text font.
.PP
.TP 8
.B Highlight
Set the text color.
.PP
.TP 8
.B BorderWidth
Set the border width.
.PP
.TP 8
.B BorderColor
Set the border color.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
DISPLAY - to get the default host and display number.
.SH FILES
/usr/lib/rgb.txt
.SH SEE ALSO
X(1), xwm(1), X(8C)
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Unable to open display or create window.
Unable to query window for dimensions. Various X errors.
.SH RESTRICTIONS
.I xcolors 
will fail if there are fewer colors available than there are
color entries in the database.
.SH AUTHOR
John Tonry

