.TH XPERFMON 1 "2 July 1985" "X Version 10"
.SH NAME
xperfmon - X window system Unix performance monitoring tool
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B xperfmon
option [ option ] [ \fIhost\fP:\fIdisplay\fP ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
This program allows you to monitor the performance of Unix on a machine.
The information will be plotted graphically on a window.
The possible options are user cpu time (\fBuser\fP),
system cpu time (\fBsystem\fP),
idle cpu time (\fBidle\fP),
free memory (\fBfree\fP),
disk transfers (\fBdisk\fP),
interrupts (\fBinterrupts\fP),
input packets (\fBinput\fP),
output packets (\fBoutput\fP),
collision packets (\fBcollision\fP).
Any or all of these options can be specified at once.
By default,
.I xperfmon
displays all of these statistics.
.PP
.TP 8
.B \-bd \fIcolor\fP
Specify the border color.  On monochrome displays, should be ``white'', ``black'',
or ``gray''; gray is the default.
.PP
.TP 8
.B \-bg \fIcolor\fP
Specify the background color.  On monochrome displays, should be ``white'' or
``black''; black is the default.
.PP
.TP 8
.B \-bw \fIpixels\fP
Specify the width in pixels of the border around the
.I xperfmon
window. The default value is 3 pixels.
.PP
.TP 8
.B \-fg \fIcolor\fP
Specify the graph color.  On monochrome displays, should be ``white'' or ``black'';
white is the default.
.PP
.TP 8
.B \-fn \fIfontname\fP
The hostname will be displayed in the specified font (if none
is specified, this defaults to 6x10).
.PP
.TP 8
.B \-hl \fIcolor\fP
Specify the hostname and scale line color; the default is to make it the same
as the graph color.
.PP
.TP 8
.B \-rv
Cause
.I xperfmon
to produce all output in black-on-white instead of white-on-black.
.PP
.TP 8
.B \-fw
Cause
.I xperfmon
to produce all output in white-on-black instead of black-on-white.
.PP
.TP 8
.B \-scale \fIinteger\fP
Specify the minimum number of divisions on the graph (default 1).
.I xperfmon
is free to use more divisions if the load gets too high to display,
but it will never use fewer divisions than this.
.PP
.TP 8
.B \-u \fIseconds\fP
Set the update rate.
.TP 8
.B =\fIgeometry\fP
Allows you to position the window on the screen.
See \fIX(1)\fP for a full description of geometry specifications.
.PP
.TP 8
.B [\fIhost\fP]:[\fIdisplay\fP]
Normally,
.I xperfmon
gets the host and display number to use from the environment
variable ``DISPLAY''.  Either or both can be specified with this option.
.I host
specifies which machine to create the
.I xperfmon
window on, and
.I display
specifies the display number.
For example,
``mit-grape-nehi:0'' creates an
.I xperfmon
on display 0 on machine mit-grape-nehi. Either value can be defaulted
by omission but `:' is necessary to specify one or both.
.SH X DEFAULTS
.PP
.TP 8
.B Background
Set the background color.
.PP
.TP 8
.B Foreground
Set the graph color.
.PP
.TP 8
.B BodyFont
Set the hostname font.
.PP
.TP 8
.B BorderColor
Set the border color.
.PP
.TP 8
.B BorderWidth
Set the border width of the window.
.PP
.TP 8
.B Border
Set the internal border of the window.
.PP
.TP 8
.B Highlight
Set the hostname and scale line color.
.PP
.TP 8
.B ReverseVideo
If ``on'', reverse the definition of foreground and background color.
.PP
.TP 8
.B Scale
Set the minimum scale.
.PP
.TP 8
.B Update
Set the update interval.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
DISPLAY - to get the default host and display number.
.SH AUTHOR
Stephen Sutphen (University of Alberta).
.SH BUGS
This program is a CPU pig, getting the information out of the kernel.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
X(8C)
