.\" Copyright (c) 1980 Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.  The Berkeley software License Agreement
.\" specifies the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.\"
.\"	@(#)vread.2v	4.1 (Berkeley) %G%
.\"
.TH VREAD 2V deprecated
.UC 4
.SH NAME
vread \- read virtually
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B vread(fildes, buffer, nbytes)
.B char *buffer;
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B N.B.:
This call is likely to be replaced by more general virtual memory facilities
in the near future.
.PP
A file descriptor is a word returned from a successful
.I open,
.I creat,
.I dup
or
.I pipe
call.
.I Buffer
is the location of
.I nbytes
contiguous bytes into which the input will be placed.
It is not guaranteed that all
.I nbytes
will be read (see
.IR read (2)).
In particular, if the returned value is 0, then end-of-file has been reached.
.PP
Unlike
.IR read (2),
.I vread
does not necessarily or immediately fetch the data requested from
.I fildes,
but merely insures that the data will be fetched from the file descriptor
.I "sometime before"
the first reference to the data, at the system's discretion.
Thus
.I vread
allows the system, among other possibilities,
to choose to read data on demand,
with whatever granularity is allowed by the memory management hardware,
or to just read it in immediately as with
.I read.
A companion
.IR vwrite (2)
call may be used with
.I vread
to provide an efficient mechanism for updating large files.
The behavior of
.I vread
if other processes are writing to
.I fildes
is not defined.
.PP
Both the address of
.I buffer
and the current offset in
.I fildes
(as told by
.IR tell (2))
must be aligned to a multiple of VALSIZ (defined in
.B <valign.h> ).
The library routine
.IR valloc (3)
allocates properly aligned blocks from the free list.
.PP
Note for non-virtual systems: the
.I vread
system call can be simulated (exactly, if less efficiently) by
.I read.
If the unit on which a
.I vread
is done is not capable of supporting efficient demand initialization
(e.g. a terminal or a pipe), then the system may choose to treat a call to
.I vread
as if it were a call to
.I read
at its discretion.
.SH SEE ALSO
read(2), write(2), vwrite (2), valloc(3)
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
A 0 is returned at end-of-file.  If the read was otherwise unsuccessful,
a -1 is returned.  Physical I/O errors, non-aligned or bad buffer addresses,
preposterous
.I nbytes,
file descriptor not that of an input file, and file offset not properly
aligned can all generate errors.
.SH BUGS
You can't
.I close
a file descriptor which you have
.I vread
from while there are still pages in the file which haven't been fetched by the
system into your address space.  In no case can a file descriptor which had
such pages at the point of a
.I vfork
be closed during the
.I vfork.
.PP
The system refuses to truncate a file to which any process has a pending
.I vread.
.PP
There is no primitive inverting
.I vread
to release the binding
.I vread
sets up so that the file may be closed.
This can be only be done, clumsily, by reading another (plain) file onto the
buffer area, or pulling the break back with
.IR break (2)
to completely release the pages.
.PP
This call is peculiar to this version of UNIX.
It will be superseded by more general
virtual memory facilities in future versions of the system.
