.\" (c) Copyright 1986 Xerox Corporation
.\" All rights reserved.
.TH DIPRESS 1 5/23/85
.UC 4
.\" differences between troff and nroff compensated here:
.ie t .ds sc \(sc
.el .ds sc section\ 
.ds lq \&"\"
.ds rq \&"\"
.if t \
.	ds lq ``
.if t \
.	ds rq ''
.SH NAME
dipress \- convert device independent troff output to interpress
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dipress
[
.BI \-f directory
] [
.BI \-o list
] [
.B \-t
] [ file ] ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Dipress
take the output of device independent
.IR troff (1)
found in the files specified,
produce an interpress file, and queue that file for printing on the
interpress printer.  If no files are specified, then standard input
is used.  The following options are understood:
.TP
.BI \-f directory
Take font information from
.I directory
instead of the default.
.TP
.BI \-o list
Print pages whose numbers are given in the comma\(hyseparated
.IR list .
The list contains single numbers
.I N
and ranges
.IB N1 \- N2.
A missing 
.I N1
means the lowest numbered page, a missing
.I N2
means the highest.
.TP
.B \-t
Direct output to standard output rather than the printer.  No queueing
is performed if this option is specified.  Redirecting standard output
is highly recommended when this option is used.
.PP
.I "Dipress"
is not usually called by users directly.  The shell script ``iptroff''
is typically used instead.
.SH FILES
.DT
/usr/local/lib/font/devipress	device and font information
.SH "SEE ALSO"
troff(1)
.SH BUGS
If you have Services 9 or earlier on your printer, long boxes will
experience a small over or under-shoot at the right end.
.PP
For a similar reason, it is recommended that the \-\fBD\fR option be used
with
.IR pic(1).
