.\" (c) Copyright 1986 Xerox Corporation
.\" All rights reserved.
.TH IPMETRICS 1 1/15/86
.CM 2
.SH "NAME"
ipmetrics \- convert an Interpress metrics master to other forms
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.B ipmetrics
[
\fB\-c\fR compositionSystem
] [
\fB\-d\fR\0 destinationLibrary
] file ...
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.I Ipmetrics
executes the Interpress metric masters given on the command line and converts
the results to the metrics formats for various composition systems.
Currently the system will produce metrics for Troff, TeX, or a generic system.
.PP
The following options are understood:
.TP
.B \-c
is used to set which composition system the output is for.  Current
arguments are troff, tex, toc, and generic.  ``toc'' means table of contents.
.TP
.B \-d
option specifies the final destination of the output metrics files.
This program
doesn't place the metrics files there immediately, it uses this option to
help generate a shell script to do the installation.  The default for this
option is site dependent.
.PP
In other than ``toc'' mode,
the standard input is a description of the mapping from the
font names in the metric master to target font names.  The standard-input
is token-based where tokens are seperated by white space.  A "#" in column
one (1) indicates a comment.  The first token on the standard input must
be "device" followed by the name of the target device.  Each line
after that contains the description of one font.  Each of these lines
has five (5)
tokens in it.  The first three are the full universal name of the font,
the next is the name as it's known to the destination composition system
and the last token names a file that will contain the mapping specification
for the font.  That file  will specify how to translate from the metric
master's character set (usually XC1-1-1) to that of the destination system.
Note that a font in the metrics master can be named multiple times to create
several logical fonts for one physical font.  Example:
.RS
# this is a commment
.br
device 8044
.br
Xerox XC1\-1\-1 TroffClassic		R    troffClassic.map
.br
Xerox XC1\-1\-1 TroffMathExtra	RN   romanNumerials.map
.br
Xerox XC1\-1\-1 TroffMathExtra	XX   xerox\-eXtra.map
.RE
.PP
The *.map files are used to map between XC1\-1\-1 and the destination system.
Each line should specify a different character in the 16 bit character space.
The first token specifies the high-order eight bits in octal and the
second token the
low-order eight bits (again in octal).  The third byte specifies the Troff
ascender/descender
information and the rest of the line specifies various names for that
character.  Example:
.RS
#char (a|de)sender	alias
.br
0 041	2	!
.br
0 042	2	"
.RE
.PP
.ta \w'$LIB/fonts/*  'u
$LIB/fonts/*	fonts
*.map	mapping files
.DT
.SH "SEE ALSO"
Xerox Font Interchange Standard, \s-2XNSS\s0 238512
.br
The Interpress Toolkit manual,
.br
dipress(1),
.br
troff(1)
.SH "BUGS"
.PP
Fuzzyness about the nature of what the DVI
.if t \(->
.if n \->
Interpress converter
wants make the TeX mode less than perfect.  Fuzzyness about the 
"easy" property of a master makes handling sizes non-uniform.
