.\" Copyright (c) 1990 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms are permitted
.\" provided that: (1) source distributions retain this entire copyright
.\" notice and comment, and (2) distributions including binaries display
.\" the following acknowledgement:  ``This product includes software
.\" developed by the University of California, Berkeley and its contributors''
.\" in the documentation or other materials provided with the distribution
.\" and in all advertising materials mentioning features or use of this
.\" software. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its
.\" contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\" from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'' AND WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.\"
.\"	@(#)cltp.4	6.1 (Berkeley) 5/30/90
.\"
.TH CLTP 4 "May 30, 1990"
.UC 5
.SH NAME
cltp \- ISO Connectionless Transport Protocol
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <sys/socket.h>
.br
.B #include <netiso/iso.h>
.PP
.B s = socket(AF_ISO, SOCK_DGRAM, 0);
.SH DESCRIPTION
CLTP is a simple, unreliable datagram protocol which is accessed
via the SOCK_DGRAM abstraction for the ISO
protocol family.  CLTP sockets are connectionless, and are
normally used with the
.I sendto 
and
.IR recvfrom 
calls, though the
.IR connect (2)
call may also be used to fix the destination for future
packets (in which case the 
.IR recv (2)
or
.IR read (2)
and 
.IR send (2)
or
.IR write(2)
system calls may be used).
.PP
CLTP address formats are identical to those used by TP.
In particular CLTP provides a service selector in addition
to the normal ISO NSAP.  Note that the CLTP selector
space is separate from the TP selector space (i.e. a CLTP selector
may not be \*(lqconnected\*(rq to a TP selector).
.PP
Options at the CLNP network level may be used with CLTP; see
.IR clnp (4).
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
A socket operation may fail with one of the following errors returned:
.TP 15
[EISCONN]
when trying to establish a connection on a socket which
already has one, or when trying to send a datagram with the destination
address specified and the socket is already connected;
.TP 15
[ENOTCONN]
when trying to send a datagram, but
no destination address is specified, and the socket hasn't been
connected;
.TP 15
[ENOBUFS]
when the system runs out of memory for
an internal data structure;
.TP 15
[EADDRINUSE]
when an attempt
is made to create a socket with a selector which has already been
allocated;
.TP 15
[EADDRNOTAVAIL]
when an attempt is made to create a 
socket with a network address for which no network interface
exists.
.SH SEE ALSO
getsockopt(2), recv(2), send(2), socket(2), intro(4), iso(4), clnp(4)
