.\" Copyright (c) 1983 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms are permitted
.\" provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
.\" duplicated in all such forms and that any documentation,
.\" advertising materials, and other materials related to such
.\" distribution and use acknowledge that the software was developed
.\" by the University of California, Berkeley.  The name of the
.\" University may not be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\" from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'' AND WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.\"
.\"	@(#)qe.4	6.2 (Berkeley) 2/14/89
.\"
.TH QE 4 "February 14, 1989"
.UC 6
.SH NAME
qe \- DEC DEQNA Q-bus 10 Mb/s Ethernet interface
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B "device qe0 at uba? csr 174440 vector qeintr"
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B qe
interface provides access to a 10 Mb/s Ethernet network through
the DEC DEQNA Q-bus controller.
.PP
Each of the host's network addresses
is specified at boot time with an SIOCSIFADDR
ioctl.  The
.B qe
interface employs the address resolution protocol described in
arp(4)
to map dynamically  between Internet and Ethernet addresses on the local
network.
.PP
The interface normally tries to use a ``trailer'' encapsulation
to minimize copying data on input and output.
The use of trailers is negotiated with ARP.
This negotiation may be disabled, on a per-interface basis,
by setting the IFF_NOTRAILERS
flag with an SIOCSIFFLAGS ioctl.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
netintro(4), inet(4), arp(4)
