.\" Copyright (c) 1980, 1990 Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" %sccs.include.redist.roff%
.\"
.\"     @(#)lxref.1	6.3 (Berkeley) %G%
.\"
.Dd 
.Dt LXREF 1
.Os BSD 4
.Sh NAME
.Nm lxref
.Nd lisp cross reference program
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm lxref
.Op Fl Ns Ar N
.Ar xref\-file ...
.Op Fl a Ar source\-file ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm Lxref
reads cross reference file(s) written by the lisp compiler
.Xr liszt 1
and prints a cross reference listing on the standard output.
.Xr Liszt 1
will create a cross reference file during compilation when it is
given the
.Fl x
switch.
Cross reference files usually end in
.Pa \&.x
and consequently
.Nm lxref
will append a
.Pa \&.x
to the file names given if necessary.
.Pp
Options and arguments:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl Ar N
The value
.Ar N
(a decimal integer)
sets the
.Em ignorelevel .
If a function is called more than
.Em ignorelevel
times, the cross reference listing will just print the number of calls
instead of listing each one of them.
The default for
.Em ignorelevel
is 50.
.It Fl a Ar source(s)
Put limited cross reference information in the
.Ar source(s)
named.
.Nm lxref
will scan the source and when it comes across a definition of a function
(that is a line beginning with
.Li "`(def'"
it will preceed that line with a list of the functions which call this
function, written as a comment preceeded by
.Li "`;.. '".
All existing lines beginning with
.Li "`;.. '"
will be removed from the file.
If the source file contains a line beginning
.Li "`;.-'"
then this will disable this annotation process from this point on until a
.Li "`;.+'"
is seen (however, lines beginning with
.Li "`;.. '"
will continue to be deleted).
After the annoation is done, the original file
.Pa foo.l
is renamed to
.Pa #.foo.l
and the new file with annotation is named
.Pa foo.l
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr lisp 1 ,
.Xr liszt 1
.Sh HISTORY
.Nm Lxref
appeared in
.Bx 4.0 .
