.TH VFONT 5 2/26/79 5
.UC
.SH NAME
vfont \- font formats for the Versatec
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B /usr/lib/vfont/*
.SH DESCRIPTION
The fonts for the Versatec have the following format.
Each file contains a header, an array of 256 character description
structures, and then the bit maps for the characters themselves.
The header has the following format:
.in +5
'nf
.sp
\fBstruct\fR header {
	\fBshort\fR		magic;
	\fBunsigned\fR	\fBshort\fR size;
	\fBshort\fR		maxx;
	\fBshort\fR		maxy;
	\fBshort\fR		xtnd;
} header;
.fi
.in -5
.PP
The
.I magic
number is 0436 (octal).
The
.I maxx,
.I maxy,
and
.I xtnd
fields are not used.
The
.I size
is the size of the
bit maps for the characters.
Before the maps for the characters is an array of 256 structures for
each of the possible characters in the font.
Each element of the array has the form:
.in +5
'nf
.sp
\fBstruct\fR dispatch {
	\fBunsigned\fR	\fBshort\fR addr;
	\fBshort\fR		nbytes;
	\fBchar\fR		up;
	\fBchar\fR		down;
	\fBchar\fR		left;
	\fBchar\fR		right;
	\fBshort\fR		width;
};
.fi
.in -5
.PP
The
.I nbytes
field is nonzero for characters which actually exist.
For such characters, the
.I addr
field is an offset into the rest of the file where the data for
that character begins.
There are
.I up+down
rows of data for each character,
each of which has
.I left+right
bits, rounded up to a number of bytes.
The
.I width
field is not used.
.SH FILES
/usr/lib/vfont/*
.SH SEE ALSO
troff(1), pti(1), vpr(1), vtroff(1)
.SH BUGS
This description was made by looking at the source for
.I vcat,
a utility of
.IR vpr (1),
hence it is incomplete and quite likely inaccurate.
If you want to be sure of the details, look at the source for
.I vcat.
.PP
The standard fonts have many problems in them; in particular, not
all sizes are available, the 3/4 em dash is the same as the hyphen
in appearance (we are currently using math minus as a replacement),
the three character ligatures don't work,
and there are a number of problems with the special font (e.g. no hands
as well as more serious problems).
