.TH LS 1L \" -*- nroff -*-
.SH NAME
ls, dir, vdir \- list contents of directories
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ls
[\-abcdgiklmnpqrstuxABCFLNQRSUX1] [\-w cols] [\-T cols] [\-I pattern]
[\-\-all] [\-\-escape] [\-\-directory] [\-\-inode] [\-\-kilobytes]
[\-\-numeric-uid-gid] [\-\-hide-control-chars] [\-\-reverse] [\-\-size]
[\-\-width=cols] [\-\-tabsize=cols] [\-\-almost-all] [\-\-ignore-backups]
[\-\-classify] [\-\-file-type] [\-\-ignore=pattern] [\-\-dereference]
[\-\-literal] [\-\-quote-name] [\-\-recursive]
[\-\-sort={none,time,size,extension}]
[\-\-format={long,verbose,commas,across,vertical,single-column}]
[\-\-time={atime,access,use,ctime,status}] [path...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page
documents the GNU version of
.BR ls .
.B dir
and
.B vdir
are versions of
.B ls
with different default output formats.
These programs list each given file or directory path.  Directory contents are
sorted alphabetically.  For
.BR ls ,
files are by default listed in columns, sorted
vertically, if the standard output is a terminal; otherwise they are
listed one per line.  For
.BR dir ,
files are by default listed in columns, sorted vertically.  For
.BR vdir ,
files are by default listed in long format.
.SS OPTIONS
.TP
.I "\-a, \-\-all"
List all files in directories, including all files that start with `.'.
.TP
.I "\-b, \-\-escape"
Quote nongraphic characters in file names using alphabetic and octal
backslash sequences like those used in C.
.TP
.I "\-c, \-\-time=ctime, \-\-time=status"
Sort directory contents according to the files' status change time
instead of the modification time.  If the long listing format is being
used, print the status change time instead of the modification time.
.TP
.I "\-d, \-\-directory"
List directories like other files, rather than listing their contents.
.TP
.I \-g
Ignored; for Unix compatibility.
.TP
.I "\-i, \-\-inode"
Print the index number of each file to the left of the file name.
.TP
.I "\-k, \-\-kilobytes"
If file sizes are being listed, print them in kilobytes.  This
overrides the environment variable POSIXLY_CORRECT.
.TP
.I "\-l, \-\-format=long, \-\-format=verbose"
In addition to the name of each file, print the file type,
permissions, number of hard links, owner name, group name, size in
bytes, and timestamp (the modification time unless other times are
selected).  For files with a time that is more than 6 months old or
more than 1 hour into the future, the timestamp contains the year
instead of the time of day.
.TP
.I "\-m, \-\-format=commas"
List files horizontally, with as many as will fit on each line,
separated by commas.
.TP
.I "\-n, \-\-numeric-uid-gid"
List the numeric UID and GID instead of the names.
.TP
.I \-p
Append a character to each file name indicating the file type.
.TP
.I "\-q, \-\-hide-control-chars"
Print question marks instead of nongraphic characters in file names.
.TP
.I "\-r, \-\-reverse"
Sort directory contents in reverse order.
.TP
.I "\-s, \-\-size"
Print the size of each file in 1K blocks to the left of the file name.
If the environment variable POSIXLY_CORRECT is set, 512-byte blocks
are used instead.
.TP
.I "\-t, \-\-sort=time"
Sort directory contents by timestamp instead of alphabetically, with
the newest files listed first.
.TP
.I "\-u, \-\-time=atime, \-\-time=access, \-\-time=use"
Sort directory contents according to the files' last access time
instead of the modification time.  If the long listing format is being
used, print the last access time instead of the modification time.
.TP
.I "\-x, \-\-format=across, \-\-format=horizontal"
List the files in columns, sorted horizontally.
.TP
.I "\-A, \-\-almost-all"
List all files in directories except for `.' and `..'.
.TP
.I "\-B, \-\-ignore-backups"
Do not list files that end with `~', unless they are given on the
command line.
.TP
.I "\-C, \-\-format=vertical"
List files in columns, sorted vertically.
.TP
.I "\-F, \-\-classify"
Append a character to each file name indicating the file type.  For
regular files that are executable, append a `*'.  The file type
indicators are `/' for directories, `@' for symbolic links, `|' for
FIFOs, `=' for sockets, and nothing for regular files.
.TP
.I "\-L, \-\-dereference"
List the files linked to by symbolic links instead of listing the
contents of the links.
.TP
.I "\-N, \-\-literal"
Do not quote file names.
.TP
.I "\-Q, \-\-quote-name"
Enclose file names in double quotes and quote nongraphic characters as
in C.
.TP
.I "\-R, \-\-recursive"
List the contents of all directories recursively.
.TP
.I "\-S, \-\-sort=size"
Sort directory contents by file size instead of alaphabetically, with
the largest files listed first.
.TP
.I "\-U, \-\-sort=none"
Do not sort directory contennts.
.TP
.I "\-X, \-\-sort=extension"
Sort directory contents alphabetically by file extension (characters
after the last `.'); files with no extension are sorted first.
.TP
.I "\-1, \-\-format=single-column"
List one file per line.
.TP
.I "\-w, \-\-width cols"
Assume the screen is
.I cols
columns wide.  The default is taken from the terminal driver if
possible; otherwise the environment variable
.B COLUMNS
is used if it is set; otherwise the default is 80.
.TP
.I "\-T, \-\-tabsize cols"
Assume that each tabstop is
.I cols
columns wide.  The default is 8.
.TP
.I "\-I, \-\-ignore pattern"
Do not list files whose names match the shell pattern
.I pattern
unless they are given on the command line.  As in the shell, an
initial `.' in a filename does not match a wildcard at the start of
.I pattern.
.SH BUGS
On BSD systems, the
.I \-s
option reports sizes that are half the correct values for files that
are NFS-mounted from HP-UX systems.  On HP-UX systems, it reports
sizes that are twice the correct values for files that are NFS-mounted
from BSD systems.  This is due to a flaw in HP-UX; it also affects the
HP-UX
.B ls
program.
.PP
The long-named options can be introduced with `+' as well as `\-\-',
for compatibility with previous releases.  Eventually support for `+'
will be removed, because it is incompatible with the POSIX.2 standard.
