.TH MAN 1
.SH NAME
man \- print sections of this manual
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B man
[ option ... ] [ chapter ] title ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Man
locates and prints the section of this manual named
.I title
in the specified
.IR chapter .
(In this context, the word `page' is often used as a synonym for `section'.)\ 
The
.I title
is entered in lower case.
The
.I chapter
number does not need a letter suffix.
If no
.I chapter
is specified, the whole manual is searched for
.I title
and all occurrences of it are printed.
.PP
.I Options
and their meanings are:
.TP 
.B \-t
Phototypeset the section using
.IR troff (1).
.TP
.B \-n
Print the section on the standard output using
.IR nroff (1).
.TP
.B \-k
Display the output on a Tektronix 4014 terminal using
.IR troff (1)
and
.IR tc (1).
.TP
.B \-e
Appended or prefixed to any of the above
causes the manual section to be preprocessed by
.I neqn
or
.IR eqn (1);
.B \-e
alone means
.BR \-te .
.TP
.B \-w
Print the path names of the manual sections,
but do not print the sections themselves.
.TP
(default)
Copy an already formatted manual section to the terminal,
or, if none is available, act as
.BR \-n .
It may be necessary to use a filter to adapt the output to
the
particular terminal's characteristics.
.PP
Further
.I options,
e.g. to specify the kind of terminal you have,
are passed on to
.IR troff (1)
or
.IR nroff .
.I Options
and
.I chapter
may be changed before each
.IR title .
.PP
For example:
.IP
man man
.PP
would reproduce this section,
as well as any other sections named
.I man
that may exist in other chapters of the manual, e.g. 
.IR man (7).
.SH FILES
/usr/man/man?/\(**
.br
/usr/man/cat?/\(**
.SH "SEE ALSO"
nroff(1),
eqn(1),
tc(1),
man(7)
.SH BUGS
The manual is supposed to be reproducible either on
a phototypesetter or on a terminal.
However, on a terminal some information is necessarily lost.
