.TH CONFIG 8 "28 July 1983"
.UC 4
.SH NAME
config \- build system configuration files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B /etc/config
[
.B \-p
]
.I config_file
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.I Config
builds a set of system configuration files from a short file which describes
the sort of system that is being configured.  It also takes as input a file
which tells
.I config
what files are needed to generate a system.
This can be augmented by a configuration specific set of files
that give alternate files for a specific machine.
(see the FILES section below)
If the
.B \-p
option is supplied, 
.I config
will configure a system for profiling; c.f.
.IR kgmon (8),
.IR gprof (1).
.PP
.I Config
should be run from the
.B conf
subdirectory of the system source (usually /sys/conf).
.I Config
assumes that there is already a directory
.I "../config_file"
created and it places all its output files in there.  
The output of
.I config
consists of a number files:
.B ioconf.c
contains a description
of what i/o devices are attached to the system,;
.B ubglue.s
contains a set of interrupt service routines for devices
attached to the UNIBUS;
.B makefile
is a file used by
.IR make (1)
in building the system; a set of header files which contain
the number of various devices that will be compiled into the system;
and a set of swap configuration files which contain definitions for
the disk areas to be used for swapping, the root file system,
argument processing, and system dumps.
.PP
After running
.IR config ,
it is necessary to run "make depend" in the directory where the new makefile
was created.
.I Config
reminds you of this when it completes.
.PP
If you get any other error messages from
.I config,
you should fix the problems in your configuration file and try again.
If you try to compile a system that had configuration errors, you
will likely meet with failure.
.SH FILES
.nf
/sys/conf/makefile.vax	generic makefile for the VAX
/sys/conf/files	list of common files system is built from
/sys/conf/files.vax	list of VAX specific files
/sys/conf/devices.vax	name to major device mapping file for the VAX
/sys/conf/files.ERNIE	list of files specific to ERNIE system
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
``Building 4.2BSD UNIX System with Config''
.br
The SYNOPSIS portion of each device in section 4.
.SH BUGS
The line numbers reported in error messages are usually off by one.
