.TH GETTY 8  "4 February 1983"
.UC 4
.SH NAME
getty  \- set terminal mode
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B /etc/getty
[ char ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Getty
is invoked by
.IR  init (8)
immediately after a terminal is opened,
following the making of a connection.
While reading the name
.I getty
attempts to adapt the system to the speed and type of terminal
being used.
.PP
.I Init
calls
.I getty
with an argument specified by the
.I ttys
file entry for the terminal line.
Arguments other than `0' can be used to make
.I getty
treat the line specially.
Normally, it
sets the speed of the interface to 300 baud,
specifies that raw mode is to be used (break on every character),
that echo is to be suppressed, and either parity
allowed.
It types a banner identifying the system (from
/usr/include/ident.h and the `login:' message.
Then the user's name is read, a character at a time.
If a null character is received, it is assumed to be the result
of the user pushing the `break' (`interrupt') key.
The speed is then
changed to 1200 baud and the `login:' is typed again;
a second `break' changes the speed to 150 baud and the `login:'
is typed again.  Successive `break' characters cycle through the
speeds 300, 1200, and 150 baud.
.PP
The user's name is terminated by a new-line or
carriage-return character.
The latter results in the system being set to
treat carriage returns appropriately (see
.IR  stty (2)).
.PP
The user's name is scanned to see if
it contains any lower-case alphabetic characters; if not,
and if the name is nonempty, the
system is told to map any future upper-case characters
into the corresponding lower-case characters.
.PP
Finally, login is called with the user's name as argument.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
init(8), login(1), stty(2), ttys(5)
.SH BUGS
