.TH RESTORE 8 4/1/81
.UC 4
.SH NAME
restore \- incremental file system restore
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B /etc/restore
key [ name ... ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.I Restore
is used to read tapes dumped with the
.IR dump (8)
command.
Its actions are controlled by the
.I key
argument.
The
.I key
is a string of characters containing
at most one function letter and possibly
one or more function modifiers.
Other arguments to the command are file or directory
names specifying which files are to be restored.
Unless the
.B \-h
flag is specified (see below),
the appearance of a directory name refers to
the files and (recursively) subdirectories of that directory.
.PP
The function portion of
the key is specified by one of the following letters:
.TP 7
.B  r or R
The tape
is read and loaded into the current directory.
[If the key is
.B R
.I restore
asks which tape of a multi volume set to start on.
This allows restore to be interrupted and then restarted.]
This should not be done lightly; the
.B r
option should only be used to restore
a complete dump tape onto a clear file system
or to restore an incremental dump tape onto this.
Thus
.IP "" 7
	/etc/mkfs /dev/rrp0g 145673 ...
.br
	/etc/mount /dev/rp0g /mnt
.br
	cd /mnt
.br
	restore r
.IP "" 7
is a typical sequence to restore a complete dump.
[Another
.I restore
can be done to get an incremental dump
in on top of this.]
.IP "" 7
A
.IR dump (8)
followed by a
.I mkfs
and a
.I restore
is used to
change the size of a file system.
.TP 7
.B  x
The named files are extracted from the tape.
If the named file matches a directory whose contents 
had been written onto the tape, this directory is (recursively) extracted.
The owner, modification time, and mode are restored (if possible).
If no file argument is given, the entire content of the
tape is extracted.
.TP 7
.B  t
The names of the specified files are listed if they occur
on the tape.
If no file argument is given,
all of the names on the tape are listed.
Note that this key replaces the function of 
.IR dumpdir (8).
.PP
The following characters may be used in addition to the letter
which selects the function desired.
.TP 7
.B  v
Normally
.I restore
does its work silently.
The
.B v
(verbose)
option causes it to type the name of each file it treats
preceded by the function letter.
[With the
.B t
function,
.B v
gives more information about the
tape entries than just the name.]
.TP 7
.B f
causes 
.I restore
to use the next argument as the name of the archive instead
of /dev/rmt?. 
[If the name of the file is `\-', restore 
reads from standard input.
Thus,
.IR dump (8)
and
.I restore
can be used in a pipeline to dump and restore a file system
with the command
.IP "" 7
	dump 0f - /usr | (cd /mnt; restore xf -) ]
.TP 7
.B y
tells
.I restore
not to complain if gets a tape error,
but simply to skip over the bad tape blocks and continue as
best it can.
.TP 7
.B m
causes
.I restore
to extract by inode numbers rather than by file name.
.TP 7
.B h
causes
.I restore
to extract the actual directory, 
rather than the files that it references.
.SH SEE ALSO
dump(8), mkfs(8)
.SH FILES
/dev/rmt?	the default tape drive
.br
rst*		the temporary file used by restore.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Complaints about bad key characters.
.PP
Complaints if it gets a read error.
If 
.B \-y
has been specified, or the user responds "y",
.I restore
will attempt to continue the restore.
.PP
If the dump extends over more than one tape,
.I restore
will ask the user to change tapes.
[If the
.B \-x
flag has been specified,
.I restore
will also ask which volume the user wishes to mount.
The fastest way to extract a small number of files is to
start with the last volume, and work towards the first volume.]
.SH BUGS
The sections in brackets are not yet implemented.
Most importantly the
.B \-r
option can only restore level zero dumps,
it cannot restore incremental dumps.
