.\" Copyright (c) 1980, 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" %sccs.include.redist.man%
.\"
.\"     @(#)cons.4	8.1 (Berkeley) %G%
.\"
.Dd 
.Dt CONS 4 vax
.Os BSD 4
.Sh NAME
.Nm cons
.Nd "VAX-11 console interface"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The console is available to the processor through the console registers.
It acts like a normal terminal, except that when the local functions are
not disabled,
.Ic \&^P
(control-P) puts the console in local console mode (where
the prompt is
.Sq Li >>> ) .
The operation of the console in this mode varies
slightly per-processor.
.Ss Tn VAX No 11/780 or 785
On either the
.Tn VAX
11/780 or 785 the following commands may be used
after placing the console in local mode with
.Ic ^P .
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width continue -compact -offset 4n
.It Ic c
.It Ic continue
Re-enter conversational mode
if the processor was halted.
.Pp
.It Ic h
.It Ic halt
Halt the CPU.
On an 11/780 or 785
the processor is not stopped by entering local console mode.
.Pp
.It Ic set t p
(set terminal program)
Re-enter conversational mode
if the processor is still
running.
.Pp
.It Ic P
(proceed)
Get out of
.Tn ODT
mode.
.Pp
.It Ic <break>
If you hit the break key on the console, then the console
.Tn LSI Ns -11
will go into
.Tn ODT
(console debugger mode).
.El
.Pp
.Ss Tn VAX No 11/750 or 11/730
On an 11/750
or an 11/730
the processor is halted whenever the console is not in conversational mode.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width continue -compact -offset 4n
.It Ic C
Return to conversational mode.
.Pp
.It Ic ret
Return from remote diagnosis mode to local console
mode.
.Pp
.It Ic \&^D
(11/750 only)
When in console mode on an 11/750 which has a remote diagnosis module,
a
.Ic \&^D
will put you in remote diagnosis mode, where the prompt will be
.ql RDM> .
.El
.Pp
.Ss Tn VAX No 8600 or 8650
The
.Tn VAX
8600 (8650) console normally works in the same way as the 11/750,
except that there are many additional modes and commands.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width continue -compact -offset 4n
.It Ic c
.It Ic continue
Return to
conversational mode.
.Pp
.It Ic halt
Halt the processor if
.Tn HEX
debug enabled.
.Pp
.It Ic p
Halt the processor if in normal mode.
.El
.Pp
With the above proviso's the console works like any other
.Ux
terminal.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /dev/console -compact
.It Pa /dev/console
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr tty 4 ,
.Xr reboot 8
.Rs
.%T "VAX Hardware Handbook"
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm cons
interface
appeared in
.Bx 4.0 .
