.\" Copyright (c) 1980, 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" %sccs.include.redist.man%
.\"
.\"     @(#)ht.4	8.1 (Berkeley) %G%
.\"
.Dd 
.Dt HT 4 vax
.Os BSD 4
.Sh NAME
.Nm ht
.Nd
.Tn TM-03 Ns / Tn TE-16 ,
.Tn TU-45 ,
.Tn TU-77
.Tn MASSBUS
magtape device interface:
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "master ht0 at mba? drive ?"
.Cd "tape tu0 at ht0 slave 0"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Tn TM-03
transport combination provides a standard tape drive
interface as described in
.Xr mtio 4 .
All drives provide both 800 and 1600
.Tn BPI ;
the
.Tn TE-16
runs at 45
.Tn IPS ,
the
.Tn TU-45
at 75
.Tn IPS ,
while the
.Tn TU-77
runs at 125
.Tn IPS
and autoloads tapes.
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It tu%d: no write ring.
An attempt was made to write on the tape drive
when no write ring was present; this message is written on the terminal of
the user who tried to access the tape.
.Pp
.It tu%d: not online.
An attempt was made to access the tape while it
was offline; this message is written on the terminal of the user
who tried to access the tape.
.Pp
.It tu%d: can't change density in mid-tape.
An attempt was made to write
on a tape at a different density than is already recorded on the tape.
This message is written on the terminal of the user who tried to switch
the density.
.Pp
.It "tu%d: hard error bn%d mbsr=%b er=%b ds=%b."
A tape error occurred
at block
.Em bn ;
the ht error register and drive status register are
printed in octal with the bits symbolically decoded.  Any error is
fatal on non-raw tape; when possible the driver will have retried
the operation which failed several times before reporting the error.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr mt 1 ,
.Xr tar 1 ,
.Xr tp 1 ,
.Xr mtio 4 ,
.Xr mt 4 ,
.Xr physio 4 ,
.Xr tm 4 ,
.Xr ts 4 ,
.Xr ut 4
.Sh HISTORY
An
.Nm
driver appeared in
.At v6 .
.Sh BUGS
May hang if physical (non-data) errors occur.
