.\" (c) Copyright 1986 Xerox Corporation
.\" All rights reserved.
.TH IPFE 1 6/16/86
.UC 4
.SH NAME
IPFE \- Interpress File Editor
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBipfe\fR [ \fIoptions\fR ] \fIinfile\fR [ \fIpagerange\fR ] ...
[ \fIinfile\fR [ \fIpagerange\fR ] ... ]
.sp 1
Options:  [\fB\-l \fIlogfile\fR ]  [\fB\-dDiLqrRsSY ]  [\fB\-a 
\fIalias:actual\fR [\fB\-a \fIalias:actual\fR ] ...]  [\fB\-b 
\fIbinding-offset:unit\fR ]  [\fB\-c 
\fIchapterize-count:unit\fR ]  [\fB\-o \fIoutfile\fR ]  [\fB\-p 
\fIlevel:propfile\fR ]  [\fB\-S \fIscale-factor\fR ]  [\fB\-X 
\fIX-offset:unit\fR ]  [\fB\-Y \fIY-offset:unit\fR ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBIPFE\fR performs editing functions on Interpress masters. It
reads the specified input Interpress files and writes the
designated output file(s). By using page ranges and other options,
pagebodies in Interpress masters may be concatenated, merged,
split into several output files (i.e., chapterized), etc.
.PP
Concatenation is accomplished by specifying more than one input
master with no pageranges.
.PP
Page selection and merging is accomplished by specifying more
than one master with a pagerange specification for at least one
of the masters. This accomplishes simple merging, such as pages 1,
2, and 4 of Master1 merged with pages 2, 4, and 5 of Master2.
.PP
In addition, a page from one master may be overlaid with pages
from other masters to create a single output page. The overlay
pages may be repositioned by specifying an xOffset and yOffset.
In this manner, graphics or images may be created as Interpress
"pages" and then merge/overlaid onto a text page of a different
master, with an option to reposition the images.
See the \fIinfile\fR [ \fIpagerange\fR ] discussion below, following
the options specifications, for syntax details.
.PP
The following options can be used with \fBipfe\fR:
.PP
.RS
(\fINote:\fR Any option with one or more arguments may be
specified as a single option, with no space between the
switch and the [first] argument, or as two options, with an
unquoted space between the switch and the [first] argument. If
there is more than one argument, they must be specified together
as a single option, separated by an [usually] optional colon. When
the colon is required, it is so indicated in the option description.)
.RE
.TP
\fB\-a \fIalias:actual\fR
(alias). If the \fB\-s\fR option is specified, replace any SIF
references matching the string \fIalias\fR with the string
\fIactual\fR before attempting to satisfy the SIF. The colon
between \fIalias\fR and \fIactual\fR is required. There may be
spaces and colons in \fIalias\fR (if there are spaces, \fIalias\fR
itself must be quoted). However, there must be no colons in
\fIactual\fR, because IPFE searches from the end of \fIactual\fR
to find the colon separating \fIalias\fR and \fIactual\fR.
There may be multiple \fB\-a\fR options. However, if there is no
\fB\-s\fR option specified, none of the alias options has any
effect.
If there is a match on any \fIalias\fR, and the corresponding
file \fIactual\fR is not found or there is some error, the
original SIF reference, \fIalias\fR, is preserved, unless the
\fB\-r\fR option is also specified. In the latter case, the SIF
reference is removed.
.TP
\fB\-b \fIoffset:unit\fR
(binding offset). Shift the image \fIoffset units\fR in the
x-direction, where \fIunit\fR may be none (default centimeters),
\fBc\fR (centimeters), \fBi\fR (inches), \fBp\fR (points), or
\fBP\fR(Picas). \fIOffset\fR may be a negative value. If the
\fB\-L\fR option is also specified, the image shift is in the
y-direction.
.TP
\fB\-c \fIcount:unit\fR
(chapterize). If the size of the output file is larger than
\fIcount units\fR, split the output file into multiple files.
Chapterization occurs only on page boundaries, every time
\fIcount units\fR is reached [where \fIunit\fR may be \fBp\fR
(pages), \fBk\fR (kilobytes), or \fBm\fR (megabytes)], and
there is no look-ahead. Therefore, if a byte specification
is used, the size of each output file may actually be larger
than \fIcount units\fR. Output file names are generated
by appending "1", "2", etc. to the file extension of
\fIoutfile\fR. (\fINote\fR that this is in \fIaddition\fR
to the possibility of an integer being appended to the output
filename if no \fB\-o\fR option is specified.)
.TP
\fB\-d\fR
(duplex). If the \fB\-b\fR option (binding offset) is specified,
apply the offset for duplex (two-sided) printing of the output
master. That is, for odd-numbered pages, the offset is applied
as specified; for even-numbered pages, the negative of the offset
is applied. If there is no binding offset specified, the duplex
option has no effect.
.IP
\fIExample:\fR
If there is a binding offset of 2P and the duplex option
is specified, odd-numbered pages are shifted 2 Picas to the right,
even-numbered pages 2 Picas to the left. If the binding offset is
-2P and duplex is specified, odd-numbered pages are shifted 2
Picas to the left, even-numbered pages 2 Picas to the right.
.TP
\fB\-D\fR
(Debug). If the \fB\-p\fR option is specified, write to the
properties file the offset within the input stream of each
skeleton-level token, in addition to the properties information
detailed in the \fB\-p\fR option. If there is no \fB\-p\fR
option specified, the Debug option has no effect.
.TP
\fB\-i\fR
(insert SIF for overlay). Insert (create) a SIF reference for
any unresolvable overlays. (See the discussion on overlays in
the \fIinfile\fR [ \fIpagerange\fR ] section below, following
the options specifications.) \fINote\fR that if an overlay is
unresolvable and the overlay specification includes a pageNum
greater than 1, no SIF reference will be created, even if the
\fB\-i\fR option is specified.
.TP
\fB\-l \fIlogfile\fR
(log). Open the file \fIlogfile\fR and record a transcript of
IPFE actions, error reports, etc. The logfile is opened
immediately upon encountering the \fB\-l\fR option in the
command line. Therefore, to record errors in the command line
specification, the \fB\-l\fR option must be the \fIfirst\fR
option specified. If no \fIlogfile\fR is specified, the default
filename "ipfe.log" is used.
.TP
\fB\-L\fR
(Landscape). Rotate every output page 90 degrees counterclockwise.
IPFE automatically applies an x- and y-image shift to preserve
the upper left corner of the image. This option is intended for
printing text pages in a landscape orientation.
.TP
\fB\-o \fIoutfile\fR
(output). Write the output Interpress master to the file
\fIoutfile\fR. If the \fB\-o \fIoutfile\fR option is \fInot\fR
specified, the following algorithm determines the output
filename (with one exception, noted below): remove the extension
from the filespec of the first \fIinfile\fR and append ".ip",
as long as \fIinfilename\fR.ip does not already exist. If it
\fIdoes\fR exist, then append "\fIn\fR.ip", where
\fIn\fR is the lowest integer that will not cause an existing
file to be overwritten.
.IP
\fINote:\fR
If the \fB\-p\fR option is specified with no \fB\-o\fR option,
then the properties
file is written with no Interpress output master. This allows
you to get information about the input stream without the
overhead of creating the Interpress output master.
.TP
\fB\-p \fIlevel:propfile\fR
(properties). Open the file \fIpropfile\fR and write the
following information about the properties of each input
master: the skeleton structure and the number of blocks,
pages, and sequenceInsertFile (SIF) references. If there
is more than one input file, the total number of blocks,
pages, and SIF references are also written. \fILevel\fR
may be \fI0\fR (default) or \fI1\fR (verbose); if \fI1\fR,
each valid pageBody and endpageBody token is indicated and
numbered.
In addition, the \fB\-D\fR (Debug) option causes the file
position of each skeleton-level token to be written.
.IP
\fINote\fR that the properties are an accounting of the
\fIinput\fR stream.
If the properties of the \fIoutput\fR stream are desired, it is
necessary to execute a second invocation of \fBipfe\fR on
the output file(s) with just the \fB\-p\fR option specified.
.TP
\fB\-q\fR
(quiet). Don't write information and error messages to STDERR.
.TP
\fB\-r\fR
(remove SIFS). Remove sequenceInsertFile (SIF) references
from the input stream. If the \fB\-s\fR option is also
specified, the \fB\-s\fR option takes precedence, and a SIF
reference is removed only if it is either unresolvable
or there is some error, such as an invalid header.
.TP
\fB\-R\fR
(Rotate). Rotate every output page 90 degrees clockwise. IPFE
automatically applies an x- and y-image shift to preserve
the center point of the image. This option is intended for
printing an image created for a "landscape printer" in portrait
orientation.
.TP
\fB\-s\fR
(satisfy SIFS). Satisfy any sequenceInsertFile (SIF) references
encountered in the input stream. This entails replacing the SIF
reference with the actual tokens in the referenced file.
The algorithm used is dependent upon the SIF type as found in the
referenced file's header. If the referenced file is not found or
there is some error, such as an invalid header, the SIF
reference is preserved, unless the \fB\-r\fR (remove SIF
references) is also specified. The Interpress filename alias
mechanism is supported via the \fB\-a\fR option.
.TP
\fB\-S \fIscale-factor\fR
(Scale). Scale the image by \fIscale-factor\fR, which can have
the format 'n/d', where both n and d must be integers, or 'a.b'.
.TP
\fB\-X \fIX-offset:unit\fR
(xImageShift). Shift the image \fIoffset units\fR in the
x-direction, where \fIunit\fR may be none (default centimeters),
\fBc\fR (centimeters), \fBi\fR (inches), \fBp\fR (points), or
\fBP\fR(Picas). \fIOffset\fR may be a negative value. The
x-direction is independent of the \fB\-L\fR and \fB\-R\fR
options (i.e., the positive x-direction is still to the right
as the image is viewed, even if a rotation is applied).
.TP
\fB\-Y \fIY-offset:unit\fR
(yImageShift). Shift the image \fIoffset units\fR in the
y-direction, where \fIunit\fR may be none (default centimeters),
\fBc\fR (centimeters), \fBi\fR (inches), \fBp\fR (points), or
\fBP\fR(Picas). \fIOffset\fR may be a negative value. The
y-direction is independent of the \fB\-L\fR and \fB\-R\fR
options (i.e., the positive y-direction is still up as the
image is viewed, even if a rotation is applied).
.TP
\fIinfile \fR[ \fIpagerange\fR ]
Each \fIinfile\fR may have a \fIpagerange\fR specification for
selecting pages from the \fIinfile\fR to merge and/or overlay.
The \fIpagerange\fR specification must immediately follow the
corresponding \fIinfile\fR specification to which it applies,
as a separate option (i.e., it must not be quoted along with
\fIinfile\fR. For shell processing, however, the pagerange
specification itself may be quoted in order to use the brackets
and parentheses required by the syntax).
.IP
\fINote:\fR In the syntax below, pageNum refers to a count of
pageBodies (excluding the preamble) in the Interpress master,
and does not necessarily match the printed page numbers on the
output pages. See the references below for a definition and
discussion of pageBodies.
.IP
The syntax for the \fIpagerange\fR specification is given in the
following psuedo Backus-Naur Form:
.RS
.IP
pageRange	::= [pageSpec,...,endPageSpec]
.IP
pageSpec	::= pageNum | pageNum-pageNum |
.br
		      pageNum[overlaySpec][...]
.IP
endPageSpec	::= pageNum- | NULL
.IP
pageNum 	::= integer
.IP
overlaySpec	::= overlayFileName | overlayFileName:pageNum |
.br
		      overlayFileName(xOffset,yOffset) |
.br
		      overlayFileName:pageNum(xOffset,yOffset)
.RE
.sp 1
.IP
The syntax rules are:
.RS
.IP 1.
The \fIpageRange\fR specification must begin with a left bracket
and end with a right bracket ("[\fIpageRangeSpec\fR]").
.IP 2.
Pages are specified by an integer corresponding to a pageBody
count, in increasing order, through the master.
.IP 3.
A minus ("-") indicates a page range.
.IP
\fIExample:\fR [4-6] includes pages 4 through 6.
.IP 4.
A comma separates pages and page ranges.
.IP
\fIExample:\fR [4,6-9] includes pages 4 and 6 through 9.
.IP 5.
A minus ("-") appearing after the final page specification
includes all pages to the end of the master.
.IP
\fIExample:\fR [4,6,9-] includes pages 4, 6, and 9 through
the last page of the master.
.IP 6.
Immediately following a page specification, a left/right bracket
pair may enclose a filename to indicate an overlay
("[\fIoverlayfile\fR]"). The overlay may be an Interpress master
or an Interpress fragment. If the overlay is an Interpress master
containing more than one page, and no overlay pageNum is
specified, IPFE uses page 1 for the overlay. There may be
more than one overlay specification for a page specification,
each enclosed in a left/right bracket pair and immediately
following one another.
.IP
\fIExample:\fR [4[pic1][pic2]] includes page 4 and overlays
it with pic1 and pic2.
.IP 7.
Immediately following \fIoverlayfile\fR in an overlay
specification, a colon followed by an \fIoverlayPageNum\fR
selects a page from \fIoverlayfile\fR for the overlay
("[\fIoverlayfile\fR:\fIoverlayPageNum\fR]").
.IP
If \fIoverlayfile\fR is an Interpress fragment, or
\fIoverlayPageNum\fR doesn't exist, the overlay specification
is ignored.
.IP
\fIExample:\fR [4[pic1:2] includes page 4 and overlays it with
page 2 of pic1.
.IP 8.
Within an overlay specification, a left/right parenthesis pair
may enclose a \fIpage offset\fR to reposition the overlay page
("[\fIoverlayfile\fR(\fIxOffset,yOffset\fR)]" or
"[\fIoverlayfile\fR:\fIoverlayPageNum\fR(\fIxOffset,yOffset\fR)]").
.IP
The \fIpage offset\fR has the form \fIxOffset,yOffset\fR
and each offset has the form \fIvalue unit\fR. The comma between
the offsets is required, and there must be no space between
\fIvalue\fR and \fIunit\fR. Unit is one of the following: none
(default centimeters), c (centimeters), i (inches), p (points),
P (Picas). The origin is the bottom left corner of the page.
The positive x-direction is to the right, and the positive
y-direction is up. X/y-directions may be positive or negative.
.IP
\fIExample:\fR [4[pic1:2(2P,4P)][pic2(-3P,-1P)]] includes
page 4 and overlays it with page 2 of pic1, offset 2 Picas
to the right and 4 Picas up, and pic2, offset 3 Picas to the
left and 1 Pica down.
.RE
.sp 1
.IP
\fIExample\fR of using a \fIpagerange\fR specification:
.IP
	ipfe infile "[1,4-6,9[pic1],10-11,12[pic2:2(2P,4P)][pic3(-4P,-2P)],15-]"
.IP
which reads:
.RS
.IP
include page 1,
.IP
skip pages 2-3,
.IP
include pages 4-6,
.IP
skip pages 7-8,
.IP
include page 9 and overlay it with pic1 (with no offset),
.IP
include pages 10-11,
.IP
include page 12 and overlay it with page 2 of pic2
(offset 2 Picas to the right and 4 Picas up) and
pic3 (offset 4 Picas to the left and
2 Picas down),
.IP
skip pages 13-14,
.IP
include pages 15 through the end of the master.
.SH AUTHOR
Mark Rollins, Xerox Corporation, Webster Research Center, October 1985.
.SH SEE ALSO
Interpress Electronic Printing Standard, Version 3.0, Xerox Corporation,
January 1986, \s8XNSS\s10 048601
.br
Introduction to Interpress, Xerox Corporation, June 1983, \s8XSIG\s10 038404
.br
The address for obtaining these documents is:
.br
		Xerox Corporation
.br
		Printing Systems Administration Office
.br
		701 South Aviation Blvd.
.br
		El Segundo, CA  90245
.SH BUGS
IPFE assumes that SIF's and overlays are either valid Interpress
fragments or Interpress masters containing a single BEGIN/END block.
If an Interpress master containing nested blocks is attempted to be
used as either a SIF or an overlay, the result may be unpredictable.
The most likely error would be the erroneous inclusion of one or
more extraneous preambles.
