.TH LAM 1 "14 June 1983"
.UC 4
.SH NAME
lam \- laminate files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B lam [ \-[fp]
min.max
.B ] [ \-s
sepstring
.B ] [ \-t
c
.B ]
file ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Lam
copies the named files side by side onto the standard output.
The
.IR n -th
input lines from the input
.IR file s
are considered fragments of the single long
.IR n -th
output line into which they are assembled.
The name `\fB\-\fP' means the standard input, and may be repeated.
.PP
Normally, each option affects only the
.I file
after it.
If the option letter is capitalized it affects all subsequent files
until it appears again uncapitalized.
The options are described below.
.IP \fB\-f\fP\ min.max
Print line fragments according to the format string
.IR min.max ,
where
.I min
is the minimum field width and
.I max
the maximum field width.
If
.I min
begins with a zero, zeros will be added to make up the field width,
and if it begins with a `\-', the fragment will be left-adjusted
within the field.
.IP \fB\-p\fP\ min.max
Like \fB\-f\fP,
but pad this file's field when end-of-file is reached
and other files are still active.
.IP \fB\-s\fP\ sepstring
Print
.I sepstring
before printing line fragments from the next file.
This option may appear after the last file.
.IP \fB\-t\fP\ c
The input line terminator is
.I c
instead of a newline.
The newline normally appended to each output line is omitted.
.PP
To print files simultaneously for easy viewing use
.IR pr (1).
.SH EXAMPLES
.de IC
.IP
.ss 36
.ft B
..
.de NC
.br
.ss 12
.PP
..
.PP
The command
.IC
lam file1 file2 file3 file4
.NC
joins 4 files together along each line.
To merge the lines from four different files use
.IC
lam file1 \-S "\\
.br
" file2 file3 file4
.NC
Every 2 lines of a file may be joined on one line with
.IC
lam \- \- < file
.NC
and a form letter with substitutions keyed by `@' can be done with
.IC
lam \-t @ letter changes
.NC
.SH SEE ALSO
pr(1), join(1), printf(3)
.SH AUTHOR
John Kunze
.SH BUGS
