.TH NFARCHIVE 8 "University of Illinois"
.SH NAME
nfarchive \- archive notesfiles
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nfarchive
[
.B "-#"
]
[
.B "-d"
]
[
.B "-m-"
or
.B "-m+"
]
[
.B "-w#"
]
[
.B "-f"
file
]
topic [ ... ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I "Nfarchive" 
is used to expire notes that have not been modified in a certain 
amount of time.
Archives are stored in ``archive notesfiles''.
.PP
The 
.B "-#" 
parameter is the number of days
a notestring must be idle (no new responses) before
being eligible for archival.
.PP
Expired notestrings are either deleted or placed in an archive.
The 
.B "-d"
parameter tells 
.I "nfarchive"
to delete expired notestrings.
If unselected,
the expired notestrings are placed in an archive.
.PP
The
.B "-m+"
option specifies that only notes marked with a 
director message are eligible for expiration.
.B "-m-"
specifies that only notes without a director message are eligible
for expiration.
By default, the expiration algorithm is indifferent to
a note's director message status.
.PP
The 
.B "-w#"
option specified the working set size
for the expired notesfiles.
The specified number 
represents the minimum number of notes to leave in the notesfile.
.PP
The expiration threshold,
working set size,
expiration action,
and
director message requirements
can all be specified as a director's option in each notesfile.
Specific values override what is specified on the
.I "nfarchive"
command line.
A default value specifies using the value specified on the
command line.
.PP
The 
.B "-f"
parameter specifies a file containing a list of notesfiles
to archive.
Notesfiles can also be specified on the command line.
.PP
By default, the archive of notesfile
.I /usr/spool/notes/somenotes
is in
.I /usr/spool/oldnotes/somenotes.
The archive of
.I /some/other/place/somenotes
also defaults to
.I /usr/spool/oldnotes/somenotes.
To prevent collisions of this nature,
mapping between active and archive notesfiles is implemented.
The file
.I /usr/spool/notes/.utilities/net.alias/Archive-into
contains lines of the form:

	active-notesfile:archive notesfile

Lines in this file beginning with `#' are comments.
Notesfiles without an entry in this file are archived into
the 
.I /usr/spool/oldnotes
directory with the appropriate last component.
.PP
When initially created, an archive notesfile
has an access list matching its active counterpart.
Currently, only directors are allowed to write in an 
archive notesfile.
.I Nfarchive
refuses to archive an archive notesfile.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 45
/usr/spool/notes/.utilities
where this programs lives.
.TP 45
/usr/spool/notes/.utilities/net.alias/Archive-into
maps active notesfiles into their archives.
.TP 45
/usr/spool/notes
Default notes data base
.TP 45
/usr/spool/oldnotes
Default archive directory
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
notes(1),
.br
.ul
The Notesfile Reference Manual
.SH AUTHORS
.nf
Ray Essick (uiucdcs!essick, essick%uiuc@csnet-relay.arpa)
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL
.sp
Rob Kolstad (kolstad@convex.UUCP)
CONVEX Computer Corporation
Richardson, TX
.fi
