.if n .ds La '
.if n .ds Ra '
.if t .ds La `
.if t .ds Ra '
.if n .ds Lq "
.if n .ds Rq "
.if t .ds Lq ``
.if t .ds Rq ''
.de Ch
\\$3\\*(Lq\\$1\\*(Rq\\$2
..
.TH CHECKNEWS 1 "October 19, 1986"
.ds ]W  Version B 2.11
.SH NAME
checknews \- check to see if user has news
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BR checknews " [ " -ynqevvN " ]  ["
.IR "newsgroup list" " ]  ["
.IR "readnews options" " ]"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Checknews
reports whether or not the user has news.
.TP 10
.B \-y
reports \*(LqThere is news\*(Rq if the user has news to read.
If the
.B \-N
flag is given,
then the newsgroups requested are also printed.
.TP 10
.B \-n
reports \*(RqNo news\*(Rq if there isn't any news to read.
.TP 10
.B \-q
causes
.I checknews
to be quiet.
Instead of printing a message, the exit status indicates news.
A status of 0 means no news, 1 means there is news.
.TP 10
.B \-v
alters the
.B \-y
message to show the name of the first newsgroup containing unread news.
Doubling
.B v
(e.g.
.BR \-vv )
will cause an explanation of
.I any
claim of new news,
and is useful if
.I checknews
and
.IR readnews (1)
disagree on whether there is news.
.TP 10
.B \-e
executes
.I readnews
if there is news.
.TP 10
.B \-N
causes the next argument to be read and interpreted as
a comma-separated list of newsgroups to be checked.
.PP
If there are no options,
.B \-y
is the default.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 40
~/.newsrc
Active newsgroups
.TP 40
/usr/lib/news/active
Options and list of previously read articles
.SH SEE ALSO
inews(8),
postnews(1),
readnews(1),
vnews(1),
news(5),
newsrc(5),
expire(8),
recnews(8),
sendnews(8),
uurec(8)
.SH BUGS
.LP
The
.B \-N
flag should really be named
.B \-n
to be consistent with other news programs,
but
.B \-n
was already used.
If the
.B \-v
flag is used with the
.B \-N
flag, the first newsgroup in the list
where there is news should be printed instead of the entire list.
If the
.B \-N
flag is used and
.I readnews
is invoked (with
.BR \-e )
it does not restrict
news reading to those groups checked, but reads all newsgroups where there
is new news.
