.if n .ds La '
.if n .ds Ra '
.if t .ds La `
.if t .ds Ra '
.if n .ds Lq "
.if n .ds Rq "
.if t .ds Lq ``
.if t .ds Rq ''
.de Ch
\\$3\\*(Lq\\$1\\*(Rq\\$2
..
.TH POSTNEWS 1 "October 22, 1986"
.ds ]W  Version B 2.11
.SH NAME
postnews \- submit news articles
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BR postnews " [ "
.IR article " ]"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Postnews
is a program that calls
.IR inews (8)
to submit news articles to USENET.
The commands should be self-explanatory, however you may type
.Ch ?
to most prompts to get a list of the possible options (except
for the \*(LqKeywords\*(Rq of the article, etc).
It will prompt the user for the title of the article
(which should be a phrase suggesting the subject,
so that persons reading the news can tell if they
are interested in the article), for the newsgroup,
and for the distribution.
.PP
The distribution is typically a geographic region or corporate region.
Typing
.Ch ?
will get you a list of the possible distributions. You should
use the minimum distribution that will serve your purpose for
posting the article. For example, if you are selling your car in New
Jersey, it is doubtful that someone in California (or Europe) would
be willing to buy it. If you don't restrict the distribution to your
local area, you will cause this article to be transmitted unnecessarily
around the world.  Currently, with a distribution of
.BR world ,
the article
will be seen in the United States, Canada, Europe, Japan, Korea and
other places.
A distribution header will, if given, be included in the headers
of the article, affecting where the article is distributed.
.PP
After entering the title, newsgroup, and distribution,
the user will be placed in an editor.
If
.B EDITOR
is set in the environment, that editor will be used.
Otherwise,
.I postnews
defaults to
.IR vi (1).
.PP
An initial set of headers containing the subject and newsgroups
will be placed in the editor, followed by a blank line.
The article should be appended to the buffer, after the blank line.
The initial headers can be changed, or additional headers added,
while in the editor, if desired.
.PP
After you have finished typing in your article, you have the
option of sending it, listing it, quitting without sending it,
editing the file again, or
saving it in a file without sending it.
.PP
For posting news from a program, see
.IR inews (8).
.LP
If the file
.I /usr/lib/news/recording
is present, it is taken as a list of
\&\*(Lqrecordings\*(Rq to be shown to users posting news.
(This is named after the recording you hear when you dial
.Ch information
in some parts of the U.S., asking you to stop and think if you really want do
do this, but not actually preventing you.)
The recording file contains lines of the form:
.PP
	newsgroup-specifier \fB\s-2TAB\s0\fP filename
.PP
for example:
.PP
	comp.all	comp.recording
.br
	local.all,!local.test local.recording
.PP
Any user posting an article to a newsgroup matching the pattern on
the left will be shown the contents of the file on the right.
The file is found in the
.B LIBDIR
directory (often
.IR /usr/lib/news ).
The user is then told to hit \s-2DEL\s0 to abort or \s-2RETURN\s0 to proceed.
The intent of this feature is to help companies keep proprietary
information from accidently leaking out.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 25
/usr/lib/news/active
List of known newsgroups and highest local article numbers in each.
.TP 25
/usr/lib/news/distributions
Suggested distribution code names
.TP 25
/usr/lib/news/newsgroups
Descriptons of newsgroups
.SH "SEE ALSO"
inews(8),
readnews(1),
vi(1),
news(5),
expire(8)
