.\" Copyright (c) 1990, 1991 Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" %sccs.include.redist.man%
.\"
.\"     @(#)autoconf.4	8.1 (Berkeley) %G%
.\"
.Dd 
.Dt AUTOCONF 4 hp300
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm autoconf
.Nd diagnostics from the autoconfiguration code
.Sh DESCRIPTION
When
.Tn UNIX
bootstraps it probes the innards of the machine
on which it is running
and locates controllers, drives, and other devices, printing out
what it finds on the console.  This procedure is driven by a system
configuration table which is processed by
.Xr config 8
and compiled into each kernel.
.Pp
Autoconfiguration on the
.Tn HP300 Ns s
is similar to that on the
.Tn VAX ,
the primary difference is in the naming conventions.
On the
.Tn HP300 ,
if devices exist which are not configured they will be ignored;
if devices exist of unsupported type they will be ignored.
.Pp
Normally, the system uses the disk from which it was loaded as the root
filesystem.
If that is not possible,
a generic system will use
.Sq Li rd0
if it exists.
If such a system is booted with the
.Dv RB_ASKNAME
option (see
.Xr reboot 2 ) ,
then the name of the root device is read from the console terminal at boot
time, and any available device may be used.
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It CPU type not configured.
You tried to boot
.Tn UNIX
on a
.Tn CPU
type which it doesn't
(or at least this compiled version of
.Tn UNIX
doesn't) understand.
.Pp
.It hpib%d at sc%d, ipl %d.
An
.Tn HP-IB
was found at sc%d (the select code)
with ipl%d (interrupt priority level).
.Tn UNIX
will call it hpib%d.
.Pp
.It %s%d: %s.
.It %s%d at hpib%d, slave %d.
An
.Tn HP-IB
disk or tape controller was found.
For disks
.Ql %s%d
will look like
.Sq Li rd0 ,
for tapes like
.Sq Li ct0 .
The
.Ql %s
in the first line will be a product type like ``7945A'' or ``9144''.
The slave number comes from the address select switches on the drive.
.Pp
.It grf0 csr 0x560000
.It grf%d at sc%d
A bit mapped display was found either at the ``internal'' address (first case)
or at some ``external'' select code (second case).
If it exists, the internal display will always be unit 0.
.Pp
.It %s%d at sc%d, ipl %d flags %d
Another peripheral controller was found at the indicated select code
and with indicated interrupt priority level.
.Ql %s
will be one of
.Xr dca 4
(single-port serial interfaces),
.Xr dcm 4
(four-port serial interfaces), or
.Xr le 4
.Pf ( Tn LAN
cards).
The slave number comes from the address select switches on the interface card.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr boot 8 ,
.Xr config 8
.Rs
.%T 4.3BSD for the HP300
.%O in the distribution documentation package
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm autoconf
feature
.Ud -beta
