.\" Copyright (c) 1983 Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.  The Berkeley software License Agreement
.\" specifies the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.\"
.\"	@(#)bit.3	6.2 (Berkeley) %G%
.\"
.TH BIT 3F ""
.UC 5
.SH NAME
bit \- and, or, xor, not, rshift, lshift bitwise functions
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B (intrinsic) function and (word1, word2)
.sp 1
.B (intrinsic) function or (word1, word2)
.sp 1
.B (intrinsic) function xor (word1, word2)
.sp 1
.B (intrinsic) function not (word)
.sp 1
.B (intrinsic) function rshift (word, nbits)
.sp 1
.B (intrinsic) function lshift (word, nbits)
.SH DESCRIPTION
These bitwise functions are built into the compiler and return
the data type of their argument(s).
It is recommended that their arguments be
Their arguments must be
.B integer
or
.B logical
values.
.PP
The bitwise combinatorial functions return the
bitwise ``and'' (\fBand\fR), ``or'' (\fBor\fR), or ``exclusive or'' (\fBxor\fR)
of two operands.
.B Not
returns the bitwise complement of its operand.
.PP
.IR Lshift ,
or
.I rshift
with a negative
.IR nbits ,
is a logical left shift with no end around carry.
.IR Rshift ,
or
.I lshift
with a negative
.IR nbits ,
is an arithmatic right shift with sign extension.
No test is made for a reasonable value of
.I nbits.
.PP
These functions may be used to create a variety of general routines, as in
the following statement function definitions:
.sp 1
.B	integer bitset, bitclr, getbit, word, bitnum
.sp 1
.B	bitset( word, bitnum ) = or(word,lshift(1,bitnum))
.br
.B	bitclr( word, bitnum ) = and(word,not(lshift(1,bitnum)))
.br
.B	getbit( word, bitnum ) = and(rshift(word,bitnum),1)
.SH FILES
These functions are generated in-line by the f77 compiler.
