.\" Copyright (c) 1985 Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.  The Berkeley software License Agreement
.\" specifies the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.\"
.\"	@(#)plot.3	6.1 (Berkeley) %G%
.\"
.TH PLOT 3F ""
.UC 6
.SH NAME
plot: openpl et al. \- f77 library interface to \fIplot\fR (3X)
libraries.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B call openpl()
.PP
.B call erase()
.PP
.B call label(str)
.B character str*(*)
.PP
.B call line(ix1, iy1, ix2, iy2)
.PP
.B call circle(ix, iy, ir)
.PP
.B
call arc(ix, iy, ix0, iy0, ix1, iy1)
.PP
.B call move(ix, iy)
.PP
.B call cont(ix, iy)
.PP
.B call point(ix, iy)
.PP
.B call linemd(str)
.B character str*(*)
.PP
.B call space(ix0, iy0, ix1, iy1)
.PP
.B call clospl()
.fi
.PP
.ft R
.SH DESCRIPTION
These are interface subroutines, in the library
.IR -lf77plot ,
allowing
.I f77
users to call the 
.IR plot (3X)
graphics routines
which generate graphic output in a relatively
device-independent manner.
The
.I f77
subroutine names are the same as the
.I C
function names except that
.IR linemod and closepl
have been shortened to
.IR linemd and clospl .
See
.IR  plot (5)
and
.IR  plot (3X)
for a description
of their effect.
.PP
Only the first 255 character in string arguments to
.I label
and
.I linemd
are used.
.PP
This library must be specified in the
.IR f77 (1)
command before the device specific graphics library;
for example, to compile and load a FORTRAN program in
.I prog.f
to run on a Tektronix 4014 terminal:
.br
.RS
.B

f77 prog.f -lf77plot -l4014

.RE
.br
See
.IR plot (3X)
for a complete list of device specific plotting libraries.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
plot(5), plot(1G), plot(3X), graph(1G)
